Toolkit
Diabetes
CARE GUIDELINESFOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE
Supporting Staff 
in The Excellence 
of Diabetes Care

2 3
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM1.0. INTRODUCTION INTRODUCTION 
FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES[SECTION-FOREWORD] Foreword
Acknowledgements
1.1. Scope of the document
1.2. Key documents to support care staff in the management of residents with diabetes
1.3. Incidence of diabetes in care home residents
1.4 Why controlling diabetes is important
2.1. Understanding diabetes
2.2. Types of diabetes
2.3. Screening for diabetes
3.1. Type 2 Diabetes Medications
3.2. [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin
3.3. [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin administration and storage 
3.4. Needle size
4.1. Nutrition & Diabetes
4.2. Carbohydrates
4.3. Approaches to reduce added sugar in residents’ diet
4.4. Diabetic residents identified as overweight or obese
4.5. Palliative Care
5.1. HbA1c targets? 
5.2. HbA1c & Frailty
5.3. Review of HbA1c
6.1. How often should we be monitoring
6.2. Emergency blood glucose monitoring
6.3. Type 1 diabetes and blood glucose monitoring
6.4. Blood glucose meters
6.5. Calibration and quality assurance of meters
6.6. What staff should carry out blood glucose monitoring? 
6.7. Guidance for residents performing their own blood glucose monitoring
6.8. Consent
6.9. Blood glucose targets2.0. WHAT IS DIABETES?
3.0. MEDICATIONS
4.0. DIET AND DIABETES
5.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL & HBA1C
6.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING7.1 Supporting a resident living with dementia and diabetes
7.2. Person-centred care
7.3. Education
7.4. Communication and connection
7.5. Emotional support
7.6. Practical support
8.1. Essentials of foot care
8.2. Toe nail cutting
7.3. Diabetic foot problems & urgent care
9.1. Signs & symptoms of hypoglycaemia
9.2. What causes hypoglycaemia? 
9.3. How to treat hypoglycaemia
9.4. Swallowing difficulties
9.5. Using a hypo box
10.1. Signs & Symptoms of hyperglycaemia
10.2. How to treat hyperglycaemia
10.3. Emergency high blood glucose levels
Appendix 1 – Resident diabetes passport care plan template
Appendix 2 – Hypo Kits
Appendix 3 – How to treat a hypo
Appendix 4 – Sick day rules (Type 2 Diabetes) 
Appendix 5 – Sick day rules (Type 1 Diabetes) 
Appendix 6 – Foot Care
Appendix 7 – [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin Safety
Appendix 8 – Audit checklist
Figure 1 – Sites used for insulin injections
Figure 2 – How to roll and invert an insulin pen
Figure 3 – Examples of hypo boxesX
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
XContents
1.0. INTRODUCTION7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
8.0. DIABETES AND FOOT CARE
9.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPOGLYCAEMIA (LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE)
10.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPERGLYCAEMIA (HIGH BLOOD GLUCOSE)
11.0. COMPLICATIONS AND ANNUAL DIABETES REVIEW
12.0. SUPPORTING A RESIDENT WHO ARE LIVING WITH DEMENTIA AND DIABETES
13.0. STAFF ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES
14.0. USEFUL RESOURCES
15.0. REFERENCES
APPENDICES
LIST OF FIGURES
1.0. INTRODUCTION INTRODUCTION 
 4“Within a care home environment 
where advancing age, chronic 
disease, frailty and disability 
concentrate among residents; 
diabetes imposes an extra health 
burden that stretches the capacity 
and skills of many care staff beyond 
their ability and it is no wonder that 
hospital admissions result”
Professor Allan Sinclair[SECTION-FOREWORD] Foreword
Over the last decade, there have been many great advances in 
diabetes care. These have been supported by multiple national 
initiatives and various evidence-based guidelines, including 
the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), 
the National Service Framework for Diabetes and not least the 
inclusion of diabetes in the Quality and Outcomes Framework 
in Primary Care. 
In spite of this, improvement in caring for residents with 
diabetes in care home settings has not been as forthcoming. 
It is important to recognise that all adults living with diabetes 
deserve to receive the same standard of care whether they live 
in their own home or a residential/nursing care setting. The 
available evidence suggests that although some good clinical 
practice exists, many care providers do not have adequate 
training provision for staff or follow good practice guidelines 
or accountability for the quality-of-care residents with diabetes 
receive.
Diabetes in Care Homes (Diabetes UK, 2010) revealed a lack 
of screening for diabetes on admission (less than a quarter of 
homes) to care homes and only one third screen for diabetes 
annually. The findings estimate that the number of residents 
living with undiagnosed diabetes may be at least 13,500 in the 
UK. If we combine this with the number currently diagnosed, 
there is a significant number of people whose diabetes 
care needs are not being met due to a lack of staff training, 
awareness and screening. It is estimated, a resident with 
diabetes is admitted to a hospital every 25 minutes and unless 
measures are put in place to address these issues, by 2051, one 
resident with diabetes from a care home will be admitted every 
10 minutes.
The Northwest Coast Diabetes Health Inequalities Programme 
recognised that the standards of care might vary between 
different populations and communities, therefore focus should 
be aimed towards improving care for those groups likely to 
experience greater diabetes health inequalities by essentially 
supporting improvement, delivery and standards in diabetes 
care. These guidelines have been developed with the objective 
of improving exactly those standards of care for all care homes 
within the Fountains Integrated Care Home Service.
Joseph McGoldrick
Joseph McGoldrick
FICHS Diabetes Project Manager 
Registered Dietitian
Healthbox CIC
1.0. INTRODUCTION 
 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM
 7Acknowledgements
Thank you to our funders, North West Coast Diabetes Health 
Inequalities Programme for forward thinking innovation to 
support our care homes, their staff and most importantly their 
residents in the provision of excellence in diabetes care. 
Equally, I would like to thank the hard work of Karen Leong, 
Diabetes Specialist Nurse at Wirral University Teaching Hospital 
for producing the comprehensive Wirral Care Homes Policy 
Document, an invaluable resource, which these guidelines were 
adapted from.
I would love to take the credit for the remarkable creative 
design and artwork of these guidelines and toolkit, however 
that would be spectacularly undeserved. Eternal thanks to the 
Healthbox CIC artistic wizard, Chris Boswell who is the creative 
genius behind this final document.
To Dr Jeevan Crasta, clinical lead at Fountains Integrated Care 
Home Service (FICHS) for his fantastic feedback, enthusiasm 
and support for our project.
A special thanks to the managers and staff of the care homes 
within the FICHS, whom without your input, feedback and 
support, this project would not get off the ground.
Finally, thank you to my mentor Georgie Charnley, for her 
unwavering support and guidance, I couldn’t do it without you.
Thank you all and best wishes
Joseph McGoldrick• To provide all FICHS care homes with a policy document 
which offers evidence-based guidelines for all staff to 
reference.
• To preserve a high degree of quality of life without 
exposing residents to needless and inappropriate medical 
and/or therapeutic interventions.
• To facilitate diabetes training to all FICH staff and 
designate a key worker as ‘diabetes champion who is 
responsible for maintaining high standards of diabetes 
care.
• To facilitate the provision of adequate support and 
opportunity to enable residents to manage their own 
diabetes where this is feasible.
• To ensure that residents living with diabetes have bespoke 
diabetes passports, care plans and follow-up specialist 
care which is easily accessible depending on clinical need.
• To achieve an optimum level of metabolic control with 
particular attention paid to frailty which ameliorates the 
malaise and lethargy of hyperglycaemia; substantially 
reduces the risk of hypoglycaemia in those residents 
taking sulphonylurea or insulin, and optimises the utmost 
level of physical and cognitive function.
• To reduce the complications and hospital admissions 
associated with diabetes.
Care home residents have the right to the same high level of 
safe, evidence-based diabetes care, regardless of whether they 
live in their own home or care home (Diabetes UK, 2010).PROJECT AND GUIDELINE AIMS:1.0. 
[SECTION-INTRODUCTION] Introduction
1.1. Scope of this document
1.2. Key supporting documents in the management of diabetes in the care home setting
1.3. Incidence of diabetes in residential and nursing homes
1.4. Why diabetes care is important1.0. INTRODUCTION 

1.0. INTRODUCTION INTRODUCTION 
1.0. INTRODUCTION  
9 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES
Care homes should have a diabetes 
policy available for all appropriate 
care staff to reference, which outlines 
best-practice diabetes care and meets 
evidence-based standards – Care Quality 
Commission (CQC), 2015.Residents living with diabetes, should 
have a person-centred care plan 
developed with the resident, family/
carers, GP and/or appropriate specialist 
healthcare provider e.g., Diabetes 
Specialist Nurse (DSN) or Consultant – 
Diabetes UK, 2013.It is recommended that at least one 
member (depending on the size of 
the home) of staff is designated as a 
‘Diabetes Key Worker’ or ‘Diabetes 
Champion’ who is responsible for 
diabetes management and maintaining 
a high standard of diabetes care for 
residents. The member of staff would 
also regularly attend updated diabetes 
training sessions - IDF, 2013 & IDOP , 
2014.1.1. Scope of 
this document1.2. Key supporting documents in the management 
of diabetes in the care home setting
This is a supporting document to assist care home staff in the 
routine management of residents with diabetes. It may also 
be used as a training reference/guide to educate new and/or 
existing staff in their development of diabetes knowledge. The 
information provided in this policy is supported by evidence-
based literature and best practice. A consultation process was 
undertaken with care homes within the Fountains Integrated 
Care Home Service (FICHS) in the development of this 
document to provide context to the level of support required 
for care staff. It was important that this was a collaborative effort 
in order to meet the needs of staff and residents.
Embedded in the policy (Appendix 8), is an audit checklist, to 
be used for auditing standards of diabetes care in your home. 
We recommend that an audit is performed a minimum of 
once a year. If any areas are identified which require change/
improvement, a follow up audit should occur within a month.  Diabetes UK – Diabetes in care homes 
awareness, screening, training (2010).
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE), 2015b. Type 1 diabetes in adults: 
diagnosis and management. NICE guideline 
[NG17].                       England-wide Care Home Diabetes 
Audit Executive [SECTION-SUMMARY] Summary, spring 2014.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE), 2015a. Type 2 diabetes in adults: 
management. NICE guideline [NG28]. IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS
8KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
Diabetes UK – Good clinical practice 
guidelines for care home
residents with diabetes (2010).
Available at:
www.diabetes.org.uk/resourc-
es-s3/2017-09/Care-homes-0110_0.pdf?_
ga=2.238422405.468428599.1505127410-
1295258485.1505127410  
Available at:
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng28/chapter/1-
Recommendations#blood-glucosemanagement-2 Available at:
www.diabetes.org.uk/re-
sources-s3/2017-09/Care_
homes_report2010_0.pdf?_
ga=2.238422405.468428599.1505127410-
1295258485.1505127410  
Available at:
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng17 Available at:
http://diabetesfrail.org/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2014/10/Eng-
land-wide-Care-Home-Diabetes-Audit.pdf 1.0. INTRODUCTION 1.0. INTRODUCTION 

10 11 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES1.0. INTRODUCTION 1.0. INTRODUCTION 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM
1.3. Incidence of diabetes in 
residential and nursing homes
1.4. Why diabetes
care is importantIn 2013, The International Diabetes Federation 
recognised that the incidence of Type 2 Diabetes 
increases with age and Diabetes doubles the risk 
of admission to a care home. Therefore, with an 
increasing aging population in care settings, comes 
the need for high quality care to safely manage their 
condition (Diabetes UK, 2010).
Approximately 1-in-4 residents may have diabetes 
in the care home setting and the same number may 
have undiagnosed diabetes. Often the diagnosis may 
be missed or undiagnosed when symptoms are non-
specific or attributed to age, especially in residents 
with dementia, learning difficulties/disabilities and 
mental health needs. The opportunities for early 
intervention may be missed with delayed/missed 
diagnosis. Moreover, with existing co-morbidities 
and related treatments, diabetes in older adults is 
potentially more complex.
• Kidney disease – diabetes is the single-most cause of end-
stage kidney disease requiring dialysis or transplant.
• Cardiovascular disease – heart failure being the most 
common and fatal complication.
• Retinopathy - People with diabetes have nearly a 50% 
increased risk of developing glaucoma, especially if they 
also have high blood pressure, and up to a threefold 
increased risk of developing cataracts, both of which can 
also lead to blindness.
• Diabetic neuropathy - if poorly controlled, can damage 
the nerves, muscles, sweat glands and circulation in the 
feet and legs leading to foot ulcers and amputations. 
Diabetes is the most common cause of lower limb 
amputations with over 135 amputations a week amongst 
people with diabetes. Many amputations are preceded 
by foot ulceration caused by a combination of impaired 
circulation and nerve damage.
The complications associated with residents living with diabetes 
include an increased risk of:
• Heart attack & Stroke
• Pressure Ulcer/Delayed Wound Healing
• Chest/Urine & Skin Infections
• Stroke
• Reduced Cognitive and Physical Function
• Hospital Admission/Readmission
Also, with impaired cognitive function or increased levels of 
pain and depression, may infer an inability to self-manage or 
report symptoms, such as those associated with hypoglycaemia.Diabetes is considered to be the fastest rising health concern 
we face in the UK, with approximately 4 million people 
diagnosed, and a new diagnosis every 2 minutes (Diabetes 
UK, 2016). Good management of blood glucose levels can 
reduce the associated complications, however, when poor 
management occurs, serious adverse events may ensue, 
including:
(Diabetes UK: Facts and Stats (2015)
Available at: https://www.diabetes.org.uk/professionals/
position-statements-reports/statistics 

13 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES 122.0. WHAT IS DIABETES? 2.0. WHAT IS DIABETES?
2.0. 
What is Diabetes?
2.1. Understanding Diabetes
2.2. Types of Diabetes
2.3. Screening for Diabetes
2.1. Understanding 
Diabetes
KEY POINTS
Diabetes is a complex chronic metabolic disorder, 
characterised by raised blood glucose levels, either 
caused by the pancreas inability to produce insulin 
(Type 1 Diabetes); or insufficient insulin is produced for 
the bodies needs (Type 2 Diabetes); or the insulin that 
is produced does not work effectively (Type 2 Diabetes 
- insulin resistance).
In healthy glucose homeostasis, the hormone insulin 
is produced by the beta cells of the pancreas, which is 
released after ingesting food and blood glucose levels 
rise.
Glucose regulation is sometimes described as a lock 
and key mechanism. [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin (key) attaches itself to the 
cell wall (lock) to unlock the cells, allowing glucose to 
be transported from the blood and into the cell where 
it can be used as fuel for energy in the body.When this mechanism breaks down in both Type 1 and 2 
Diabetes, the body is unable to control blood glucose levels 
and unless lifestyle and/or medication interventions are 
implemented, blood glucose will remain dysregulated.
If blood glucose levels remain chronically high (hyperglycaemia), 
over time this can cause damage to cells, blood vessels and 
organs, leading to complications.
These may include:
• Damage to the eyes, which can cause visual problems 
(retinopathy) and sometimes blindness
• Damage to the kidneys (nephropathy)
• Damage to the nerves including those supplying the legs, 
feet, stomach, kidneys and the organs within the body 
(neuropathy)
• Damage to the heart, blood vessels and brain which can 
lead to heart attacks and strokes (cardiovascular)
People with Type 2 diabetes are at a very high risk of 
developing cardiovascular problems such as heart attacks and 
strokes. It is estimated that 75% of people with diabetes die 
because of cardiovascular complications. In addition, the life 
expectancy of people with diabetes may be reduced by up to 
15 years.
(National Institute for Health and Care Excellence [NICE], 
(2011) diabetes in adults quality standards (QS6). 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs6/chapter/introduction
Retrieved from: Diabetes UK 2021
www.diabetes.org.uk/diabetes-the-basicsDiabetes develops when glucose can’t enter the body cells to 
be used as fuel. This happens because either:
In the case of Type 1 
diabetes, there is no key 
(insulin) to unlock the door 
to the cells.Or, in the case of Type 2 
iabetes, the key (insulin) is 
unable to unlock the door 
properly.
and/or the key (insulin) is 
there but the lock doesn’t 
work properly.

14 15 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM2.0. WHAT IS DIABETES?
2.2 Types of Diabetes
There are several types of diabetes. For the purposes of these 
guidelines, the two main types discussed are Type 1 diabetes 
and Type 2 diabetes and will be the focus. Type 2 diabetes is 
more prevalent in older adults; therefore, it is likely that there 
will be higher numbers of people in care homes with this type 
of diabetes. Both Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes have distinct 
differences and characteristics, these are summarised in the 
table below.
The table illustrates that Type 1 Diabetes tends to have an 
earlier onset and occurs in people under 40. Type 1 Diabetes 
accounts for approximately 10% of all diabetes cases in the UK 
and is characterised by no insulin production by the pancreas, 
therefore individuals will require lifelong regular insulin 
injections/pumps to manage their blood glucose levels.
In Type 2 Diabetes, onset mostly occurs in adults over 40; 
however, there are increasing cases of children developing 
this type of diabetes. Type 2 Diabetes is most prevalent in 
the care home setting and probably the most likely for you to 
encounter. At diagnosis, individuals with Type 2 Diabetes are 
encouraged to make changes to their diet and lifestyle in order 
to control their blood glucose levels. In addition, depending on their HbA1c levels, people may be prescribed a first-line oral 
medication called Metformin. This is often succeeded by further 
medications depending on the progression of the condition. If 
oral medications do not control blood glucose levels, residents 
may need to be started on an insulin regimen. If a resident 
progress to insulin, this does not change their diagnosis to Type 
1 Diabetic, but rather they are an ‘insulin-dependent Type 2 
Diabetic’
Regardless of the type of diabetes our residents are living with, 
they are at risk of developing associated complications, which 
may be life-threatening. Therefore, it is important that each 
resident has a regularly reviewed, person-centred care plan to 
best manage their condition.2.0. WHAT IS DIABETES?
KEY POINTS
• Diabetes is a long-term, complex condition characterised 
by high blood glucose levels and several associated 
complications
• Type 2 diabetes is more prevalent in care homes
• A diagnosis of diabetes MUST be documented in the 
resident’s diabetes passport/care plan and notes
• Residents MUST be screened for diabetes on admission to 
the home and at two yearly intervals, please discuss with 
the resident’s GP
2.3. Screening for Diabetes
Compared with the general population, there is 
a higher incidence of diabetes and undiagnosed 
diabetes in the care home setting; therefore, it is 
recommended that residents should be screened for 
diabetes on admission and every 2 years thereafter by 
the GP (IDF, 2013 & Diabetes UK, 2010).
NB. It is important that this is discussed with the FICHS 
GP and the date and frequency is documented in the 
residents’ care plan/diabetes passport (see appendix 
1) and case notes. In addition, care staff should be 
aware of the signs and symptoms of diabetes, as 
some residents may present with these but not have a 
formal diagnosis. Also, it is important to recognise that 
residents may not be able to articulate (depending on 
progression of dementia) signs and symptoms, making 
the awareness of care staff even more pertinent.
These include:
• Increased thirst
• Passing more urine than normal, especially at 
night
• Blurred vision
• Recurrent infections, especially genital thrush
• Cuts and wounds may take longer to heal
• Tiredness and sleeping more than normal
• Weight loss
Please alert the FICHS GP if any of the above 
symptoms are present and the resident is not known to 
have diabetes so that screening can then take place.
Figure 1: Differences between Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes. Retrieved from: www.diabetesinhealthcare.co.ukTYPE 1 DIABETES TYPE 2 DIABETES
[SECTION-INSULIN] InsulinThe body doesn’t produce any
insulin as the insulin-producing
cells have been destroyedThe body can still produce some insulin, but not 
enough and/or the insulin doesn’t work properly 
(insulin resistance)
Onset Symptoms develop quickly Symptoms tend to develop slowly
AgeDevelops at any age but usually before the  
age of 40Usually appears in people over the age of 40 
but generally about 10 years earlier in people of 
Black and South Asian ethnicity
PrevalenceAccounts for approximately 10%
of all people with diabetesAccounts for approximately 90% of all people 
with diabetes
TreatmentTreated by taking insulin (either by
injection or pump), a healthy diet
and regular physical activityTreated with healthy diet and regular
physical activity. Medications, including
insulin, may also be required

17 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES3.0. MEDICATIONS  
3.0. 
Medications
3.1. Type 2 Diabetes Medications
3.2. [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin
3.3. [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin administration & storage
3.4. Needle size
163.0. MEDICATIONS 
3.1. Type 2
Diabetes MedicationsThe following medications are used in Type 2 diabetes to lower 
and control the blood glucose levels. You may be aware of your 
residents who are on some of these medications:
Medications such as gliclazide, and other tablets within this class of drugs (sulphonylureas), can increase the resident’s risk of 
hypoglycaemia. If residents are on insulin this can also increase a resident’s risk of hypoglycaemia. These residents will need to be 
monitored more closely for signs of hypoglycaemia and treated appropriately (see section 8, treating hypoglycaemia).  If residents are 
experiencing episodes of hypoglycaemia, please ensure these are promptly treated and contact the resident’s GP or other specialist 
health care provider e.g., Consultant or Diabetes Specialist Nurse to review the resident. The resident’s medications will also need to 
be reviewed and may need to be adjusted and the underlying cause of hypoglycaemia identified.NAME & CLASS OF 
MEDICATIONOTHER BRAND 
NAMESHOW THE DRUG WORKSPOTENTIAL SIDE 
EFFECTSWHEN TO GIVE
metformin  
(biguanides)Glucophage, 
SukkartoReduces glucose 
production from 
the liver, increases 
insulin sensitivityNausea, vomiting, 
abdominal bloating, 
diarrhoeaTo be given with 
food. Doses usually 
split and given 2-3 
times daily with 
meals
Gliclazide,  
Glimepiride,  
Glipizide  
(Sulphonylureas)**Diamicron,  
AmarylIncreases insulin 
production from the 
pancreasWeight gain, 
nausea, 
hypoglycaemiaPreferably give with 
food once or twice 
daily depending on 
dose
Pioglitazone  
(Thiazolidinedione) Actos Reduces insulin 
resistance,  
increases insulin 
sensitivityWeight gain, fluid 
retention, increased 
risk bone fractures 
in women, 
associated risks with 
bladder cancerOnce daily
Repaglanide,  
Nateglanide  
(prandial glucose 
regulators) **Prandin,  
StarlixStimulates insulin 
secretion from the 
pancreasHypoglycaemia, 
nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal painWithin 30 minutes 
before main meal
Sitagliptin,  
Saxagliptin,  
Alogliptin  
(dpp4 inhibitors)Januvia, 
Onglyza,  
VipidiaIncreases insulin 
secretion in relation 
to foodHypoglycaemia  
if used with  
sulphonylurea 
medicationsOnce daily
Dapaglifozin,  
Canagliflozin  
(sglt2 inhibitors)Forxiga,  
InvokanaStops the kidney 
reabsorbing glucose. 
This is then excreted 
from the body in the  
urineGenital thrush, 
urine infections, low 
blood pressureOnce daily
Exenatide,  
Liraglutide (glp1 
mimetic injections)Bydureon,  
VictozaGiven as injections. 
Increases insulin 
secretion and slows 
gastric emptyingNausea, abdominal 
bloating/
discomfort, reduced 
appetiteOnce weekly or once 
daily depending on 
which medication 
used
Figure 2 – Different types of medications used to control blood glucose levels in Type 2 Diabetes.
NB. The medications marked with a double Asterix sign (**) have a higher risk of hypoglycaemia for residents who may be 
prescribed these.

19 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM 18BACKMEDICATIONS 3.0. MEDICATIONS 3.0. 
3.2. [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin
[SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin is a hormone which lowers blood glucose levels and is used for people with Type 1 diabetes as their body does not produce 
insulin. It is also used in people with Type 2 diabetes in addition to their other diabetes medications. There are different types of 
insulin, some of which are identified in the table below. Some of your residents may be on these different types of insulin.3.3 [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin Administration 
& Storage
Figure 1 – illustration of appropriate insulin injection 
sites. NB. When administering insulin injections ensure 
the injection sites are rotated. Do not give the insulin 
in the same area in that site every day.NAME OF 
INSULINCOLOUR OF 
INSULINDURATION 
OF ACTIONWHEN TO BE GIVEN
Lantus 
(long-acting 
insulin)Clear Lasts approximately 
24 hoursGiven once daily, same time each day but doesn’t need to 
be given with food.
Levemir 
(long-acting 
insulin)Clear Lasts 20-24 hours 
approximatelyUsually given once a day. Can also be given twice a day, 
same time(s) each day. Doesn’t need to be given with food.
Humalog 
(rapid acting 
insulin)Clear Lasts approximately 
3-5 hoursGiven with food, just as food is about to be eaten. Can be 
given at the very end of the meal but only if advised to do 
so by GP or diabetes specialist team.
Novorapid 
(rapid acting 
insulin)Clear Lasts approximately 
3-5 hoursGiven with food, just as food is about to be eaten. Can be 
given at the very end of the meal but only if advised to do 
so by GP or diabetes specialist team.
Apidra 
(rapid acting 
insulin)Clear Lasts approximately 
3-5 hoursGiven with food, just as food is about to be eaten.  Can be 
given at the very end of the meal but only if advised to do 
so by the GP or diabetes specialist team.
Novomix 30 
(mixed insulin)Cloudy Each injection lasts 
10-16 hours  
approximatelyGiven twice daily with breakfast and evening meal. Give as 
food about to be eaten. Has to be mixed prior to injecting.
Humalog 
Mix 25 
(mixed insulin)Clear Each injection lasts 
10-16 hours  
approximatelyGiven twice daily with breakfast and evening meal. Give as 
food about to be eaten. Has to be mixed prior to injecting.
Humulin m3 
(mixed insulin) Cloudy Each injection lasts 
up to 12 hours  
approximatelyGiven twice daily with breakfast and evening meal. Give 30 
minutes before food. Has to be mixed prior to injecting.
Insuman comb  
15, 25, 50 
(mixed insulin)Cloudy Each injection lasts 
between 11-20  
hours approximatelyGiven twice daily with breakfast and evening meal. Give 30 
minutes before food. Has to be mixed prior to injecting.
Figure 3 – Different types of insulin used to control blood glucose levels for individuals who are insulin-dependent.FRONT
• Correct information! You MUST ensure the correct insulin is 
used and corresponding insulin pen device, by checking the 
resident’s identification is confirmed as correct and that the 
insulin is in date. 
• Once in use the insulin should be kept at room temperature for 
up to 30 days, or as per manufacturer’s instructions, not in the 
fridge. Only unused insulin pens or vials should be kept in the 
fridge and away from the freezer compartment. 
• Ensure a new insulin needle is used for each injection. DO NOT 
leave the needle on the pen after use, dispose of this in the 
sharps bin. 
• Ensure the insulin pen is primed before each use – dial 2 units 
on the pen and dispel the units into the sink (known as the ‘air 
shot’). Look for a bead of insulin at the end of the pen.  If this is 
missing, repeat the 2 unit ‘air shot’. If after repeated priming no 
insulin is seen at the end of the pen DO NOT use the pen.
• If residents are on a mixed or cloudy insulin ensure the insulin is 
mixed prior to use. Gently invert the pen for 10 times and roll 
the pen for 10 times until the insulin looks white not cloudy. DO 
NOT shake the insulin as this will affect the insulin molecules. 
• Check the resident’s injection sites at regular intervals for any 
lumpy areas. You may need to palpate the injection sites with 
your hands as the lumps may be underneath the skin. If there 
are any lumpy areas do not inject into these and avoid this area. 
• Ensure the insulin is given at the appropriate times. For rapid 
acting and mixed insulin these need to be given with meals. 
• DO NOT UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES withdraw insulin 
from a pre-filled insulin pen or insulin cartridge with a syringe. 
This can have fatal consequences for the resident. [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin may 
only be withdrawn from an insulin vial using an appropriate 
prescribed insulin syringe and needle, and only as directed by 
the GP or diabetes specialist team.KEY POINTS
Please ensure to consider the following points when administering 
insulin injections: 
How to roll (A) and invert (B) the insulin pen prior to use. Do not 
vigorously shake the insulin. Figure 2 – Technique to roll and invert 
insulin pens.
A BNOTE: AWAITING STEVE TO
TAKEN PICTURES

20 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM
3.4 Needle Size
A 4mm pen needle is recommended as the safest needle to use 
when giving insulin injections as this reduces the risk of giving 
the insulin via an intramuscular injection. In obese residents, a 
5mm needle may be acceptable. DO NOT reuse needles, these 
are meant for single use only. Dispose of insulin needles in a 
prescribed sharps bin.MEDICATIONS 3.0. 
Residents who require insulin injections are at a higher risk 
of having a hypoglycaemic event. These residents will need 
to have their blood glucose levels monitored more closely. If 
residents on insulin are having hypoglycaemic events, please 
contact the GP as soon as possible to review the resident’s 
medication. The insulin doses may need to be adjusted.
KEY MESSAGESTHINGS TO REMEMBER
• A variety of medications are available to manage blood 
glucose levels for use in residents with diabetes.
• Residents with Type 1 diabetes will be on regular daily 
insulin injections.
• Residents with Type 2 diabetes may be on oral 
medications and insulin injections.
• Medications including insulin and gliclazide tablets 
will increase a resident’s risk of hypoglycaemia. These 
residents will require closer monitoring of their blood 
glucose levels.
• Ensure all staff are aware of which residents are on these 
high-risk medications.
• A needle size of between 4mm and 5mm is advocated for 
insulin injections. Do not reuse needles.
• Ensure the insulin is given at the correct time – this may 
not necessarily coincide with the drug rounds.
• NEVER withdraw insulin from a pre-filled insulin pen 
or insulin cartridge, use the corresponding insulin pen 
provided.
214.0. 
Diet & Diabetes
4.1. Nutrition & Diabetes
4.2. Carbohydrate
4.3. Approaches to reduce added sugar in residents’ diet
4.4. Diabetic residents identified as overweight or obese
4.5. Malnutrition
4.6. Palliative Care4.0. DIET & DIABETES

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM 22 234.0. DIET & DIABETES
 4.0. DIET & DIABETES
4.1 Nutrition & Diabetes
A suitable, individualised nutrition care plan is important to 
managing a resident’s diabetes. Please ensure a well-balanced 
diet with proportional quantities of macronutrients (Fat, Protein 
& Carbohydrates) rich in micronutrients (vitamins, minerals, 
fibre) and adequate fluids are provided.
KEY POINTS
• Regular meals - tailor meal patterns to each resident’s 
needs. If a resident is on insulin or sulphonylurea tablets 
(e.g., gliclazide) regular carbohydrate-containing meals 
are important to avoid hypoglycaemia and meal times 
should coincide with administration of these medications
• Include high fibre, low GI (slow releasing), wholegrain 
carbohydrates
• Ensure there is a consistent amount of carbohydrate at 
each meal
• Limit sugar and sugary foods (but no need for a ‘sugar 
free’ diet)
• There is no need for ‘Diabetic’ foods, they are often 
expensive, have no additional nutritional benefit and often 
high in fat
• Include more vegetables and fruit
• Include more beans and lentils
• Reduce overall fat intake• Include dairy products (or alternative fortified/enriched 
dairy free products) such as milk, cheese, yoghurt
• Oily fish – aim for at least two portions of fish per week, 
with at least one portion being oily fish (e.g., salmon, 
pilchards, sardines, mackerel) as they are beneficial for 
reducing cardiovascular disease risk factors
• Limit salt and processed foods due to the impact on 
blood pressure
• Limit high saturated/trans fat foods such as cakes, biscuits, 
chocolate, etc
• Encourage alcohol in moderation
• Promote physical activity as functional status allows
• Ensure adequate amounts of fluid are given
• Recommendations for carbohydrate, alcohol and meal 
patterns should be tailored to the needs of each resident 
with the aim of reducing hypoglycaemia risk in residents 
treated with sulphonylureas or insulin (NICE, 2015a)
Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group 2011; IDF 2013; TREND-UK & Institute of Diabetes for Older People (IDOP) 2013; National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 2015a.STARCH
Bread, pasta, pulses (peas, beans, 
lentils), flour, some found in vegetables, 
particularly root vegetablesADDED SUGAR
Sugar sweetened beverages, table 
sugar, sweets, jelly, chocolate, cakes* 
biscuits* puddings*NATURAL SUGARS
Fruit (fresh, frozen, tinned) fruit juice, 
milk, yoghurt, fromage frais4.2 Carbohydrates
All carbohydrates are broken down to release the sugar glucose 
for use as energy. If consumed in excess, can cause high 
blood glucose levels. If too little carbohydrates are eaten by 
residents who are prescribed insulin or sulphonylurea tablets 
(e.g., gliclazide) hypoglycaemia can ensue. Reducing the risk of 
hypoglycaemia should be a particular aim for these residents 
(NICE, 2015a). 
The portion of carbohydrate consumed is the key component 
affecting blood glucose levels (American Diabetes Association 
(ADA), 2004a, 2004b; Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group, 
2011) i.e., the greater the serving of starch and sugar containing 
foods and drinks consumed, the higher the blood glucose 
levels will rise. It is important to note, most foods comprising 
carbohydrate from starch or natural sugars also offer the body 
with other important nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, 
fibre, protein; however, the majority of foods/drinks containing 
added sugars are low in nutrients and have a negative impact 
on dental health (Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition 
(SACN) 2015). Consequently, while people with diabetes 
can include some sugar containing foods in place of other 
carbohydrates, as part of a balanced diet (Diabetes UK 
Nutrition Working Group, 2011; IDF, 2013), everyone (with/
without diabetes) is advised to reduce the intake of added 
sugars (SACN, 2015) and caution should be exercised to avoid 
excess energy intake (NICE, 2015a).
CARBOHYDRATES ARE FOUND IN THE FOLLOWING FOODS AND DRINKS
*Also contains starch e.g., flour

25 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES 24 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM4.0. DIET & DIABETES 4.0. DIET & DIABETES
4.3 Approaches to 
reduce added sugar in 
residents’ diet
• Consider offering sugar-free, no added sugar or diet 
squashes/fizzy drinks instead of full sugar varieties.
• Avoid/limit adding sugar to hot drinks, consider offering 
sweeteners as a replacement.
• When baking/cooking, reduce the amount of sugar 
added, frequently the quantity specified in a recipe can 
be halved without having a negative impact on the final 
product. Also, some recipes lend themselves well to 
sweeteners as a substitute.
• Reduce portion sizes/frequency of sugar sweetened 
products
There is no need for a ‘special diabetic diet’ (TREND-UK, 2010; 
IDOP , 2013) or ‘diabetic foods’ (Diabetes UK, 2010; Diabetes UK 
Nutrition Working Group, 2011; NICE, 2015a). Diabetic foods 
provide no benefit to individuals with diabetes. They may still 
affect blood glucose levels, often contain just as much fat and 
energy as the regular varieties, often have a laxative effect and 
are more expensive (Diabetes UK, 2010; Diabetes UK Nutrition 
Working Group, 2011).
The most important factor is to make sure portions of starchy 
and natural sugar containing foods are not excessive. When 
offering carbohydrates, encourage slower release (lower 
Glycaemic index (GI)) (NICE, 2015a) as they may have an 
additional benefit for blood glucose levels (Brand-Miller et 
al., 2003; ADA, 2004a, 2004b; Opperman et al., 2004; Thomas 
& Elliott, 2009; Thomas & Elliott, 2010; Diabetes UK Nutrition 
Working Group, 2011). Most slower releasing carbohydrates are 
less processed and higher in fibre.Examples of low GI slow releasing carbohydrates include:
• Vegetables/salad vegetables
• Most fruits
• Pulses (peas, beans, lentils)
• Oats (e.g., porridge, natural muesli, oat-based bread), 
All-Bran
• Grainy/seeded/stone ground bread
• New potatoes, sweet potato (with skin on) 
• Pasta (wholegrain versions are lower GI)
• Basmati or easy cook rice (wholegrain versions are the 
best choice) 
Serving size of carbohydrate foods is still the biggest factor 
affecting blood glucose levels (Diabetes UK Nutrition Working 
Group, 2011). Regular nutritional screening of residents by care 
home staff with appropriate skills and training is also important 
to identify malnutrition – (Care Quality Commission (CQC), 
2014; NICE, 2006; 2012) For homes in the FICHS, it is important 
to follow the MUST care pathway and implement all relevant 
steps. Keep food record charts to monitor carbohydrate intake, 
primarily when reviewed in combination with blood glucose 
records for any residents who have their levels monitored.4.4. Diabetic residents 
identified as 
overweight or obese
Losing weight is the biggest predictor for reducing the risk 
of developing Type 2 Diabetes in those who are at high risk 
(Hamman et al., 2006; Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group, 
2011) and should be the primary diabetes management 
strategy in those with Type 2 diabetes who are overweight/
obese (Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group, 2011). Residents 
who are functionally independent should be supported to 
achieve a healthy body weight (IDF, 2013).
An initial aim of 5-10% weight loss is recommended (NICE, 
2015a), and is associated with a reduced risk of developing 
Type 2 diabetes (Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group, 2011), 
reduction in blood pressure (Feldstein et al., 2008; Diabetes UK 
Nutrition Working Group, 2011), cholesterol levels, improved 
blood glucose levels and reduction in mortality (Williamson 
et al., 2000). Weight loss should be achieved through long 
term lifestyle changes (ideally changes to diet and increase in 
physical activity levels where possible). Specific goals should 
be identified and negotiated as part of the care planning 
process. An initial weight loss target of 5-10% is advised. 
Lower amounts of weight loss may still be of benefit and in the 
longer-term greater weight loss to achieve a healthy weight will 
have benefits (NICE, 2015a). The focus for weight management 
should be on total energy intake rather than on the source 
of energy in the diet as there is insufficient evidence for best 
dietary approach (Franz et al., 2010; Diabetes UK Nutrition 
Working Group, 2011; Wheeler et al., 2011; Ajala et al., 2013).
Dietary changes may include:
• A reduction in portion sizes, particularly of high fat/
sugar processed foods (e.g., cakes, biscuits, crisps, etc.) 
and starchy foods at meals (bread, rice, potatoes, pasta, 
cereal). Use of a smaller plate can facilitate this
• Increased vegetable/salad portions (low in calories and 
high in fibre)
• Reduction in snacking. (In rare circumstances a diabetes 
specialist may advise that a resident requires snacks to 
prevent hypoglycaemia if on certain insulin regimens).
If snacks are included encourage lower calorie and 
carbohydrate options e.g., salad vegetables cut into 
batons; single handful fruit; small serving of yoghurt; plain 
biscuit e.g., cracker, Nice, Rich Tea, Marie
• Reducing intake of high fat and refined carbohydrate/
sugar foods such as cakes, chocolate, biscuits, puddings, 
crisps, sugary drinks, sweets, etc
• Reducing added sugar intake (see above)

27 26 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM4.0. DIET & DIABETES 4.0. DIET & DIABETES
4.6. Palliative Care 4.5. Malnutrition
Avoidance of hypoglycaemia and symptoms of hyperglycaemia 
are priority for residents with diabetes receiving palliative 
care. Dietary provision, which is non-invasive and optimises 
nutritional and fluid intake, should be a priority (Diabetes 
UK Nutrition Working Group, 2011). Nutrition should be 
personalised to the resident’s overall condition, not focused 
solely on their diabetes (Diabetes UK, 2013a; 2013b). If palliative 
care residents request ‘sugary’ foods these should be provided, 
with diabetes medication being adjusted as required (Diabetes 
UK, 2013b).Malnutrition is common in older adults, particularly in care 
settings (British Association of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition 
(BAPEN), 2015) and diabetes is known to increase the risk of 
under-nutrition (Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group, 2010).
Malnutrition is associated with longer and more frequent 
hospital admissions, increased mortality, pressure ulcers, 
delirium, and depression. Possible causes of malnutrition 
include:
• Poor appetite
• Altered taste and smell
• Swallowing difficulties
• Oral and dental problems (It is estimated that people 
with diabetes can be up to approximately three times 
more likely to develop gum disease than people without 
diabetes). Functional impairments
• Low mood
• Reduced cognition
For residents who are malnourished or who are at risk of 
malnutrition, healthy eating changes may be unsuitable 
as they may result in weight loss. All care home residents 
should be screened for malnutrition, by a member of staff 
with appropriate skills and training, on admission and at 
regular (monthly) intervals, with more frequent monitoring if 
malnutrition risk is identified (BAPEN, 2003; NICE, 2006). Their 
screening results and goals of nutrition should be documented 
and communicated in writing between care settings (NICE, 
2012). The Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST) 
is widely recommended for nutritional screening (BAPEN, 
2003). See Cheshire West MUST Care Pathway for further 
information.Nutrition support should be considered in residents who are 
identified as malnourished or at risk of malnutrition:
• Less than 18.5kg/m2
• Unintentional weight loss greater than 10% in the past 3-6 
months
• BMI less than 20kg/m2 and unintentional weight loss 
greater than 5% in the past 3-6 months (NICE, 2006)
Residents identified as being malnourished or at risk of 
malnutrition can be identified by MUST score 1 or 2 or above 
and should be managed in line with MUST protocol (BAPEN, 
2003), including implementation of a ‘Food First’ (high calorie 
and protein) diet.
This includes:
• High calorie, higher protein foods and nourishing drinks
• Fortify usual foods
• Encourage smaller more frequent meals and snacks
• Change food texture if required
• Provide nutritious drinks between meals
• Calm, distraction free environment to eat in
Sugar does not raise blood glucose levels more than the 
equivalent amount of starchy carbohydrate and, in most 
situations standard nutrition support protocols should be 
followed and adjustment of diabetes medication prioritised 
over dietary restriction (Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group, 
2011), with a diabetes review requested. If there are concerns 
about raised blood glucose levels there should be a focus on 
fats/proteins (cream, cheese, butter, oils) rather than sugars for 
fortification as this will reduce the impact on
blood glucose levels.NUTRITION & DIABETES KEY POINTS:
• There is no ‘special diet for diabetes’ – this should be 
balanced and varied.
• Residents on insulin and sulphonylurea medications 
(including gliclazide) should have regular meals and doses 
optimised to avoid hypoglycaemia.
• There is no need for ‘diabetic foods’ – these can have a 
laxative effect and are expensive.
• Carbohydrates have the biggest impact on resident’s 
blood glucose levels – these all break down in the 
stomach to form glucose.
• Carbohydrate portion sizes are one of the biggest factors 
affecting blood glucose levels.
• For homes in the FICHS, nutritional screening should be 
implemented using the MUST care pathway on admission 
to the home and at least monthly intervals.
• For residents receiving palliative care it is important to 
avoid hypoglycaemia and symptomatic hyperglycaemia. 
Diet should be tailored to the resident’s overall condition, 
not just their diabetes.
 FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES5.0. Blood Glucose 
control & HbA1C
In order to minimise osmotic symptoms and prevent associated 
complications, it is recommended that reasonable blood 
glucose control should be promoted (NICE clinical guideline 
[NG28], 2015a). However, tight diabetes control is not usually 
recommended in the care home setting, this should be 
assessed using a person-centred approach.
• A snapshot of diabetes control can be measured by a 
non-fasting blood test called HbA1c, offering information 
about what the diabetes control has been like for the 
previous 2-3 months
• It is recommended that in adults with Type 2 diabetes, 
HbA1c is measured at 3-6 monthly intervals until this is 
stable and the resident’s treatments are not being altered. 
Once the HbA1c is stable and the resident’s medications 
are no longer being altered this test can be checked 
every 6 months (NICE, 2015a). Please discuss this with 
the resident’s FICHS GP and document in the diabetes 
passport/care plan how frequently the HbA1c should be 
checked and the date when this is due to be taken• For adults with Type 1 diabetes, it is recommended that 
the HbA1c is checked every 3-6 months (NICE clinical 
guideline (NG17), 2015b). Again, this should be discussed 
with the FICHS GP , documented in the resident’s 
diabetes passport/care plan. Please ensure staff know 
the frequency and date when the blood test is due to be 
taken
• For the care of residents with diabetes at end of life, 
information relating to diabetes control can be found 
in the following Diabetes UK document. Please follow 
this link: www.diabetes.org.uk/professionals/position-
statements-reports/diagnosis-ongoing-management-
monitoring/end-of-life-care 5.0. 
Blood Glucose 
control & HbA1C
5.1. HbA1c targets 
5.2. HbA1c and Frailty
5.3. Review of HbA1
285.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL & HBA1C 5.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL & HBA1C 
FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES5.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL & HBA1C 
305.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL & HBA1C 
5.1. HbA1c targets 5.2. Review of HbA1c
Historically, HbA1c targets were expressed as a percentage, 
however results are now represented in mmol/mol. In adults, 
HbA1c targets are set between 48 and 53mmol/mol, however 
it has been recommended that these targets may be too tight 
for frail, older adults with Type 2 Diabetes and a more relaxed 
HbA1c target should be considered for these individuals (NICE 
clinical guideline (NG28), 2015a).
For adults with Type 1 diabetes the national target for HbA1c is 
set at 48mmol/mol or lower (NICE, 2015b). This target, however, 
should be individualised for each person, taking into account 
their daily activities, the likelihood of complications, other 
conditions that the person may have and whether they have a 
history of hypoglycaemia (NICE, 2015b).The HbA1c target for each resident should be reviewed 
at least once a year as part of their annual diabetes 
review, by the FICHS GP with specific attention given 
to frailty, optimisation of medications, nutrition and 
functional assessment.
A report of the resident’s HbA1c result should be made 
available to the care home staff and a record kept in 
the resident’s diabetes passport/care plan and medical 
notes. This will enable the care staff to take a more 
active role in the resident’s diabetes management.
Please discuss and confirm what the HbA1c target is 
for each resident with the FICHS GP and document in 
the resident’s diabetes passport/care and ensure all 
relevant staff are aware.
KEY POINTS:
• HbA1c is a blood test which measures the resident’s 
diabetes control for the last 2-3 months
• It is recommended that HbA1c is measured every 3-6 
months for residents with Type 2 diabetes if this is not 
stable and the resident’s treatments are being altered. 
Once the HbA1c is stable this can be measured every 6 
months. Please confirm the frequency with the GP and 
document in the resident’s care plan
• For residents with Type 1 diabetes the HbA1c should be 
measured every 3-6 months
• A report of the HbA1c result should be made available 
to care home staff so they can be actively involved in the 
resident’s diabetes management
• The HbA1c target should be individualised for each 
resident and documented in their care plan and notes.
• The HbA1c target should be reviewed at least once a 
year at the annual review by the resident’s GP or other 
specialist health care provider
• Understand that frailty is a serious but avoidable 
complication of diabetes
• Tailor goals of care and HbA1c targets with measures of 
frailty status
• Take specific actions to improve patient outcomes – 
practical intervention should be taken in the management 
of older adults with diabetes and frailty

32 33
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES5.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL & HBA1C 5.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL & HBA1C 
5.3. HbA1c & Frailty
DIABETES AND FRAILTY
Emerging evidence suggests frailty and sarcopenia (age-related 
lean muscle loss characterised by loss of power) are recognised 
as new complications of diabetes in older adults (Sinclair, 2017); 
and, Type 2 Diabetes has been identified as a risk factor for 
the development of frailty and sarcopenia. Therefore, priority 
should be given to strategize how to implement preventative 
measures to reduce these risk factors in residents with diabetes. 
Since regular physical activity and optimising nutrition are key 
aspects in reducing risk, implementation of these should be 
prioritised in our residents’ care plan and may have significant 
advantages in delaying or preventing these associated 
complications. 
In 2017, The National Collaborative Stakeholder on Frailty 
in Diabetes published a position statement to provide a 
framework for action in managing older adults with diabetes 
and frailty (Sinclair et al., 2017). The document highlights five 
key messages to address the issues of frailty in diabetes:1. Understand that frailty is a serious but avoidable 
complication of diabetes 
Diabetes increases the risk of the development of frailty, 
which is associated with hypertension, renal impairment 
and dementia. Diabetes may decrease mobility and restrict 
activities of daily living (ADL) by approximately 50-80%, 
which increases with age (Wong, 2013).
2. Be aware of the shortfalls of current international 
guidance 
Several well received international guidelines have been 
developed, however have been criticised for being 
developed for specialist interventions, which lack practical 
translation to varied primary care settings. The evidence 
has been reviewed, to provide realistic glycaemic targets 
which align with specific categories of frailty (Strain, 2018).
3. Use simple methods to detect frailty and assess 
functional status 
The Electronic Frailty Index (EFI), together with a 4-meter 
gait score and a timed get-up-and-go test are invaluable 
tools in the assessment of frailty in primary care.
4. Tailor goals of care with measures of frailty status 
It was acknowledged that there are increasing concerns 
of polypharmacy in older adults with diabetes which 
increases the personal and public burden (GP , ambulance 
call outs and hospitalisations) of hypoglycaemia and 
the lack of individualised targets for frail older adults. A 
consensus view recommends few diabetic individuals aged 
70 years and over benefit from intensive blood glucose 
targets of less than 53 mmol/mol, as available evidence 
does not support these targets. Whereas, a more relaxed 
target range of between 53-58mmol/mol for reasonable 
functionality; 64mmol/mol for moderate to severe frailty 
and a HbA1c target of 70mmol/mol for severe frailty 
(Strain, 2018).5. Take specific actions to improve patient outcomes. 
Practical action should be taken in the management of 
older adults with diabetes and frailty:
• Older adults with diabetes over the age of 65 should be 
assessed for frailty and severity using EFI tool, together 
with a 4-meter gait score and a timed get-up-and-go test
• HbA1c targets should be safe, sensible and appropriate – 
with the aim of keeping residents free of adverse events, 
maintain optimal quality of life, well-being and functional 
status
• Residents with diabetes and frailty should have their 
medications reviewed regularly and a de-escalation 
approach adopted where appropriate
• Even though there are no restrictions on glucose lowering 
agents in frail older adults with diabetes, care should 
be taken when assessing the need for longer-acting 
sulfonylureas, complex insulin regimens, undernutrition, 
residents in care homes and severe frailty, all of which 
increase the risk of hypoglycaemia
• Thiazolidinediones (pioglitazone) and SGLT-2 inhibitors 
should be limited in moderate-to-severe frailty due to 
the adverse side-effects of unintentional weight loss, 
dehydration and possible amputations (NICE, 2018). In 
addition, GLP-1 receptor agonists may cause unintentional 
weight loss and anorexia, therefore great caution should 
be exercised
• The FICHS in collaboration with care homes and the wider 
diabetes service should consider implementation of the 
frailty diabetes pathway to address frailty, multimorbidity 
and cognitive impairment for diabetes residents
• Care staff and healthcare professionals who are involved 
in the management of diabetic residents should receive 
training to upskill in the area of frailty and functional 
status to deliver optimal care
1.0. 1.0. INTRODUCTION INTRODUCTION 
FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES
 34FRAILTY
Is an adverse health condition, characterised by susceptibility 
to physical or psychological stressors due to reduced 
physiological reserve which affect multiple organ systems that 
confers a limited capacity to maintain homeostasis. One of 
the conceptual models which form the assessment of frailty 
by clinicians requires a person to meet at least three of the 
following criteria (Fried, 2001):
• Upper and lower extremity weakness
• Poor exercise tolerance
• Exhaustion
• Weight loss
Key: eFI=electronic frailty index; SGLT-2=sodium-glucose co-transporter-2; GLP-1=glucagon-like polypeptide-1FRAILTYDE-ESCALATION THRESHOLD TREATMENT TARGET
THRESHOLDSUGGESTED 
INTERVETNIONTARGET INTERVENTON
Fit older adult 
with diabetes53 mmol/molEvaluate long-acting 
sulfonylurea and insulin 
therapy that may cause 
hypoglycaemia. Consider 
appropriate dosage in the 
setting of renal function.58 mmol/molAvoid initiating new 
agents that may cause 
hypoglycaemia or 
exaggerate weight loss.
Moderate-
severe frailty 
with diabetes58 mmol/molDiscontinue any 
sulfonylurea if HbA1c 
below threshold. Avoid 
TZDs because of the 
risk of heart failure. 
Cautious use of insulin 
and metformin mindful of 
renal function.64 mmol/molDPP-4 inhibitors and 
longer-acting insulins 
have demonstrated safety. 
TZDs may increase risk 
of heart failure. SGLT-2 
inhibitors may provide 
additional benefit in 
people with heart failure 
but also exacerbate 
symptoms of diabetes.
Very severe 
frailty64 mmol/molWithdraw sulfonylureas 
and short-acting insulins 
because of risk of 
hypoglycaemia. Review 
timings and suitability of 
NPH insulin with regard 
to risk of hypoglycaemia. 
Therapies that promote 
weight loss may 
exacerbate sarcopenia.70 mmol/molDPP-4 inhibitors at renally 
appropriate dose for 
those close to target. 
Consider once-daily 
morning NPH insulin or 
analogue alternatives if 
symptomatic nocturnal 
hyperglycaemia. 
Educate carers and 
relatives regarding risk of 
hypoglycaemia.
Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group 2011; IDF 2013; TREND-UK & Institute of Diabetes for Older People (IDOP) 2013; 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 2015a.
Diabetes UK Nutrition Working Group 2011; IDF 2013; TREND-UK & Institute of Diabetes for Older People (IDOP) 2013; 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 2015a.
FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES
 366.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING 6.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING
6.0. Blood glucose 
monitoring
All residents with diabetes must have their condition monitored. 
This may be done by the FICHS GP , district nurse or hospital 
diabetes team. Independent residents may be advised to self-
monitor their own blood glucose levels.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 
guidelines recommend, in certain circumstances, people living 
with diabetes will be required to self-monitor their own blood 
glucose levels (NICE, 2015a; NICE, 2015b). Although, in the 
care home setting this may not always be practical or realistic 
and only a small proportion of residents will have the capacity 
and/or practical skills to monitor their own blood glucose levels 
(BGLs). The majority of residents will require support from 
appropriately trained staff to monitor their BGLs. It is important 
to confirm and document (in diabetes passport/care plan) the 
frequency of monitoring with the residents FICHs GP .
A resident will need to have their BGLs (if they cannot do it 
themselves) by an appropriately trained member of staff for:
1. Residents with Type 1 diabetes
2. Residents with Type 2 diabetes if any of the following 
criteria are met:
• If the person is on insulin
• If the person is on a group of medications called 
sulphonylureas (example – gliclazide) as these can 
cause hypoglycaemia (hypos)
• If there is evidence that the person has been having 
hypoglycaemic events (hypos) or there is evidence that 
a hypoglycaemic event is occurring
• When starting treatments such as oral or intravenous 
steroids, short term monitoring of the blood glucose 
levels by care home staff may be appropriate
• If the diabetes control (HbA1c) is suboptimal and 
medications have been started or adjusted to improve 
this, short term monitoring by care home staff may 
be recommended by the resident’s GP or diabetes 
specialist health care provider6.0. 
Blood glucose 
monitoring
6.1. How often should we be monitoring
6.2. Emergency blood glucose monitoring 
6.3. Type 1 diabetes and blood glucose monitoring
6.4. Blood glucose meters
6.5. Calibration and quality assurance of meters
6.6. What staff should carry out blood glucose monitoring? 
6.7. Guidance for residents performing their own blood glucose monitoring
6.8. Consent
6.9. Blood glucose targetsSAFETY
• Residents who need to have their BGLs monitored MUST 
HAVE their own blood glucose monitor and lancet device 
and these SHOULD NOT BE shared between residents 
and individual lancets MUST NOT be shared between 
residents after use. Single-use disposable lancets (discuss 
this with FICHs GP) should ideally be used when carrying 
out a blood glucose check
• Blood glucose testing lancets and insulin needles are 
classified as sharps and considered clinical waste, 
therefore must be disposed of in a prescribed sharps bin 
and not regular domestic waste – advice can be sought 
from prescribing pharmacists on collection and disposal of 
used sharps bins
• Thorough hand washing is important prior to blood 
glucose testing. Please wash hands with soap and water 
and DO NOT use alcohol agents or wipes to cleanse prior 
to testing as this may produce a false reading
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM
 396.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING 6.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING
6.1. How often should 
we be monitoring?6.3. Type 1 diabetes 
and blood glucose 
monitoring
6.2. Emergency blood 
glucose monitoring How often to monitor BGLs is specific to the resident living 
with diabetes, this should be assessed and determined by 
either the FICHs GP or specialist diabetes healthcare provider 
i.e., Consultant Diabetologist, Diabetes Specialist Nurse 
(DSN). These recommendations should be documented in 
the residents diabetes passport and medical care notes. Staff 
responsible for monitoring BGLs should be made aware of 
the frequency as documented in the diabetes passport.
Follow this link for NICE guidelines about blood 
glucose monitoring in residents with Type 2 diabetes 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng28/chapter/
Recommendations#blood-glucose-management-2 
For NICE guidance about blood glucose monitoring in 
residents with Type 1 diabetes please follow this link: 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng17/chapter/
Recommendations#blood-glucose-management Residents with type 1 diabetes may need to have their BGLs 
monitored more regularly (NICE, 2015b). Where residents do 
not have the capacity or physical capability to perform blood 
glucose monitoring independently, appropriately trained care 
home staff will be responsible for checking BGLs in-line with the 
residents diabetes passport. In addition, if a resident with type 
1 diabetes records a reading of >15mmols, it is recommended 
that ketones are also checked, either with a blood glucose 
monitor with a ketone function or using a urine test. When 
blood glucose levels are very high, ketones are produced when 
the body metabolises fat as a source of energy (see section 10).
KEY POINT
Please document within each resident’s care plan the method to 
be used for ketone testing if required and any equipment to be 
used (e.g., ketone meter and specified meter, or urine test).
Follow this link for NICE guidelines on Type 1 diabetes for 
further advice on blood glucose management: 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng17/chapter/1-
Recommendations#blood-glucose-management-2  
If a resident is experiencing the signs and symptoms of 
hypoglycaemia (low blood glucose), become acutely unwell, 
semi-conscious/unresponsive – see section 9; it may be 
necessary to check BGLs, regardless of the frequency outlined 
in the residents’ diabetes passport. Where hypoglycaemia is 
suspected BGLs MUST be checked.
KEY POINT
If residents are on medications such as insulin or tablets 
including gliclazide these can cause hypoglycaemia. Where a 
care home has a resident living with diabetes on any of these 
medications, there MUST be a minimum of one member 
of staff available who has been assessed as competent and 
appropriately trained to check BGLs in an emergency.

40 41
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES6.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING 6.0. 
6.5. Calibration and 
quality assurance  
of meters6.6. What staff should 
carry out blood 
glucose monitoring? 
It is recommended that blood glucose meters are calibrated 
using a quality control test which should be performed using 
the manufacturers’ specified quality control solution. This test 
should be performed regularly, usually at least once a month, in 
accordance with the manufacturers’ instructions
and the results of the test are documented. 
Prior to use please ensure the control solution is gently shaken 
to ensure this is mixed well. Please store the control solution 
as per manufacturer’s instructions and note the expiry date, 
ensuring all staff who are responsible for meter calibration are 
aware of this.
General recommendations for calibrating a meter and 
performing a quality control test include:
• When a meter is new, check prior to use
• When a new pot of test strips has been prescribed. Strips 
should be tested prior to use with residents and at least 
once a month if the strips are not used again within a 
month of opening
• If a blood glucose reading is taken and this looks 
abnormal and out of range for that resident
Each meter company will provide their own control solution for 
use with their corresponding meters. The expiry date for each 
manufacturer’s control solutions will differ. Please consult the 
manufacturer’s instructions and DO NOT use a control solution 
if this has expired. 
NB. What to do if the quality control test is not accurate.
If a meter is not reading within the range specified for a control 
solution test this may mean the meter could be faulty and 
should not be used. Please contact the resident’s GP , Practice 
Nurse, hospital diabetes team or Diabetes Specialist Nurse 
to obtain a new meter. Alternatively ensure a supply of spare 
meters are kept within the home for use in such circumstances.
Please keep a record of when a quality control test has been 
performed for each meter and the result of the test.It is recommended that each care home should clearly define 
who is responsible for monitoring BGLs (Diabetes UK, 2010); 
however, in nursing home settings, it is advised registered 
nurses should be designated to carry out blood glucose 
monitoring (Diabetes UK, 2010).
Each care home should ensure that any member of staff 
undertaking blood glucose monitoring must have completed 
appropriate training to carry out the procedure and be assessed 
by a designated registered practitioner (Community Specialist 
Registered Nurse or Diabetes Specialist Nurse) that they are 
competent to do so.
Before performing blood glucose monitoring, all members of 
staff (whether registered or otherwise) should have a sound 
knowledge base of diabetes. In addition, staff should receive 
adequate training on blood glucose monitoring using the 
specific meter used in their place of employment and know how 
to interpret the reading(s) recorded and the appropriate action 
to be taken (Diabetes UK, 2010). NB. Scope of practice.
• Members of staff who are non-registered practitioners 
e.g. carer/senior carer/support worker/health care 
assistant must work within their scope of practice and are 
responsible for their actions and/or omissions. If a care 
home requires a non-registered member of staff must 
receive appropriate blood glucose monitoring training 
and demonstrate competence in the procedure and have 
regular (typically annually) reassessment of competence 
by a registered practitioner e.g. DSN or community 
specialist nurse
• Where it is necessary for an unregistered member of staff 
to monitor blood glucose levels, an agreement should be 
reached with the care home manager and a designated 
registered practitioner e.g. DSN or community specialist 
nurse to assess the member of staff and sign them off 
as competent. The competency assessment should be 
recorded and filed as evidence
• Any blood glucose measurements taken by unregistered 
staff must be given to a duty nurse at the time taken and 
the reading recorded in the appropriate documentation
• Record keeping – clear, standardised and appropriate 
documentation must be maintained when recording any 
blood glucose measurements (Diabetes UK, 2010)

FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES43
 426.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING 6.0. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING
6.7. Guidance for 
residents performing 
their own blood 
glucose monitoring6.8. Consent
6.9. Blood glucose 
targetsWhere a resident has the physical ability and capacity to 
monitor their own blood glucose levels and it is appropriate 
for them to do so, this may be encouraged; however, in the 
care home setting this will be a small proportion of residents 
(Diabetes UK, 2010). If a resident is independently monitoring 
their blood glucose levels, a structured assessment should 
be carried out at least annually and can be combined with 
the residents annual diabetes review and should include the 
following:
• The person’s self-monitoring skills
• The quality and frequency of testing
• Checking that the person knows how to interpret the 
blood glucose results and what action to take
• The impact on the person’s quality of life
• The continued benefit to the person
• The equipment used i.e., the meter
(Retrieved from: www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng28/chapter/1-
Recommendations#blood-glucose-management-2)  As blood glucose monitoring is an invasive procedure it is 
recommended that verbal/written consent should be obtained 
from the resident to perform this test. If there is doubt over 
the person’s ability to provide valid consent then The Mental 
Capacity Act (2005) and the health care professionals code of 
professional practice should be followed. Please liaise with 
the resident’s FICHS GP or social services for further advice if 
required.
KEY POINT
• Residents living with Type 1 diabetes and a small 
proportion of Type 2 diabetics will need to have their 
blood glucose levels monitored. For residents who cannot 
independently monitor, care home staff will need to 
perform this procedure
• Residents who require their blood glucose levels to be 
monitored by care home staff should have their own 
blood glucose meter and lancet device – these should 
not be shared, or single use disposable lancets should be 
used
• Only blood glucose meters which comply with ISO 
standards (2013) should be used
• Meters should be calibrated regularly as per 
manufacturer’s instructions
• The targets for blood glucose readings should be 
determined on an individualised basis and documented in 
the resident’s care plan and notes
• For residents who are on insulin or sulphonylurea 
medications, including gliclazide, at least one member of 
staff in each home must be trained and assessed as being 
competent to check a resident’s blood glucose in an 
emergency situationTargets for blood glucose levels should be individualised for 
each resident by the FICHS GP or diabetes specialist health 
care provider and discussed/agreed with the resident. Targets 
should be clearly documented in the residents diabetes 
passport/care plan and communicated to the staff responsible 
for their care. 
When setting blood glucose targets for residents’, safety and 
well-being are a priority, therefore avoiding symptoms of 
hypoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia should be at the forefront.
A fasting blood glucose level is a reading taken first thing in 
the morning when waking and before eating carbohydrate 
containing food/fluid. It is recommended this level should 
not be below 6 mmol for residents in the care home setting 
(Diabetes UK, 2010), as this is considered too low for frail older 
adults with diabetes and may increase their risk of falls and 
hypoglycaemia.

7.1. Communication 
and connection
With the progression of dementia, language skills and 
vocabulary may diminish. As a consequence, communication 
can become increasingly challenging and frustrating for the 
person living with dementia. Often they find it difficult to 
express themselves clearly and/or understand what others say.
Consider adapting your communication style by adapting the 
following strategies to help residents cope with these changes:
• Face the person and position yourself at eye level.
• Stay still when talking, and in the person’s line of vision.
• Avoid competing noises, turn off the TV or radio or turn 
down the volume.
• Remain calm, talk in a gentle, matter-of-fact way.
• Allow plenty of time for what you have said to be 
understood and do not rush a response.
• Keep sentences short and simple when discussing or 
explaining something.
• Try not to interrupt the person when they are speaking.
• Give people time to come up with a word or thought.
• Invite residents to participate rather than instruct them to 
do things.
• Avoid ordering the person around or argue.
• Use orienting names whenever you can, such as ‘Your son 
John’.
• Respect the person’s rights and wishes. Having dementia 
does not mean a person is incapable of speaking for 
themselves.
• Consider the person’s literacy level when giving them 
written information.
• Consider using a telephone interpreter, if this might be 
helpful.
457.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
447.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
7.0. 
Diabetes and 
Dementia
7.1 Supporting a resident living with dementia and diabetes
7.2. Person-centred care
7.3. Communication and connection
7.4. Emotional support
7.5. Practical support
VISION PROBLEMS
Poorly controlled diabetes can lead to  damage to eyesight, 
therefore vision problems are common in people with diabetes. 
Problems caused by poor vision can be mistaken for signs of 
dementia. For example, vision problems can lead to confusion 
or disorientation. It is important to find out if the resident you 
are supporting has problems with vision and what strategies 
are in place to manage this. The resident should have their 
eyesight checked regularly as part of their annual review by 
an optometrist or ophthalmologist. In addition to glasses, the 
person may benefit from other devices such as magnifiers, large 
print diaries, medicine dispensers and talking clocks.

46 47
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA 7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
EARLY DIABETES DIAGNOSIS IS 
IMPORTANT IN DEMENTIA
People living with dementia may be unable to recognise the 
signs and symptoms of diabetes, which can be compounded 
further by an inability to articulate the presenting symptoms. 
Often, infections such as urinary tract infections and thrush are 
the only signs residents have diabetes.
People with diabetes are encouraged to manage the condition 
themselves so diagnosing dementia in people who have 
diabetes will lead to difficulties with self-management and 
adherence with medication, including giving themselves insulin 
injections safely. Having both conditions may mean agreeing to 
higher targets for blood glucose and blood pressure to keep 
people safe, and help the person and their family to make 
sensible decisions about the future.
Diagnosing diabetes early in residents who have dementia will 
ensure they receive regular review and management of the risk 
factors that can lead to developing diabetes complications, 
therefore are identified quickly and treated as required. If 
necessary, medications can be started to relieve the symptoms 
of high blood glucose which will improve quality of life (e.g. 
reduce tiredness, frequency of urination, thirst) and avoid 
hospital admissions for very high blood glucose levels.HYPOGLYCAEMIA AND DEMENTIA
People with dementia may not be able to recognise symptoms 
of hypoglycaemia (see section 9), therefore care staff need to 
be vigilant. If hypoglycaemia is not treated, the person may 
fall, lose consciousness, choke and can trigger a stroke or heart 
attack. 
Agree safe blood glucose targets which aim to avoid 
symptomatic high blood glucose levels (hyperglycaemia) 
but avoid low blood glucose levels (hypoglycaemia). Oral 
medications which cause hypoglycaemia (sulphonylureas) 
should be avoided where possible. Ensure regular meals and 
snacks are provided for people who use insulin.
DIABETES CARE IN DEMENTIA
People living with diabetes for several years may be skilled 
at managing their own insulin injections and monitoring 
blood glucose levels, however, the onset of dementia may 
compromise these skills. People with dementia who develop 
diabetes may appear to have a worsening of their dementia 
because of the diabetes symptoms.7.2 Supporting a 
resident living with 
dementia and diabetesDementia is an umbrella term for people suffering 
from a range of neurological disorders which result in 
cognitive impairment, memory loss and compromised 
motor skills. There are more than 100 types of 
dementia, the most common being Alzheimers, 
however people will also be familiar with vascular 
dementia, Parkinson’s Disease (PD) and Lewy body 
dementia. It is a progressive disease where the 
condition worsens over time and the person may 
struggle with Activities of Daily Living (ADLs), become 
disorientated and have difficulty managing social 
situations. Signs and symptoms of dementia vary from 
person to person and usually get worse over time. 
Early symptoms include forgetfulness, repetitiveness, 
short-term memory loss, and difficulty in finding the 
right words.
LINK BETWEEN DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
There is a doubling of risk associated for people living with 
diabetes developing dementia. Whereas people without 
diabetes, there risk is approximately 1 in 10. The reasons for this 
are not fully understood, however is likely to be multifactorial, 
including: 
• High blood glucose levels (hyperglycaemia) can damage 
the cells and blood vessels in the brain
• When blood vessels in the brain are damaged, brain cells 
may not get enough oxygen and nutrients to function 
properly and may die
• [SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin resistance causes the body to produce higher 
levels of insulin to try to keep blood glucose levels within 
the normal range. The high levels of insulin can cause 
damage to blood vessels and cells in the brain
• Diabetes may contribute to the build-up of proteins 
in the brain associated with Alzheimer’s disease. The 
research that links diabetes and dementia often does not 
distinguish between diabetes types and it is not clear 
if the increased risk of dementia is the same for people 
with type 1 diabetes. However, since anyone can develop 
dementia, the information in this toolkit about early 
symptoms and reducing the risk of dementia may also be 
helpful when supporting people with type 1 diabetes
ISSUES FOR PEOPLE WITH DEMENTIA
WHO DEVELOP DIABETEISSUES FOR PEOPLE WITH DIABETES
WHO DEVELOP DEMENTIA
• Developing incontinence as they need to pass urine 
more often but not able to find the toilet.
• Increased risk of falls due to more frequent visit to 
the toilet
• Increased confusion if blood glucose levels are high 
and causing dehydration
• Distress if usual diet changed significantly
• Distress, wandering, rocking movements, crying if 
they have pain and are unable to put this into word• Forgetting to take medications regularly
• Forgetting they have taken medication so at risk of 
double dosing
• Forgetting how to do injections
• Unable to make decisions about interpreting blood 
glucose results such as adjusting insulin doses or 
treating hypoglycaemia
• Missing meals and drinks so at risk of low blood 
glucose levels and dehydration
• Forgetting they have eaten and at risk of high 
glucose levels if they eat again
FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES
 48 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA 7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
7.3 Person-centred care 
Person-centred care makes sure each person receives care in 
the way they want to be treated. It places the person at the 
centre of their own care and also considers the needs of the 
person’s family and/or carers.
Principles of person-centred care
1. Get to know the person beyond their diagnosis
2. Support the person to set goals, and to plan and make 
decisions about their care
3. Be sensitive to values, preferences and expressed needs.
4. Give complete and accurate information in a way the 
person understands so they can make choices about their 
care
5. Work together to minimise duplication of services and 
have one key contact at your agency
In the early stages of dementia, the resident should be fully 
involved in directing the planning and delivery of their diabetes 
care. As dementia progresses, the person’s capacity to do this 
is likely to decrease and another person who has power of 
attorney or guardianship should be involved to advocate for 
the person. Speak to the person and, where possible, to their 
partner or family carer to find out:
• How the person currently manages their diabetes 
(including their target blood glucose levels, medicines, 
recommended diet and physical activity)
• How dementia affects their diabetes management
• How you can support independence and quality of life
• Other information that they wish to share with you to 
make your job easierPersonality
• Symptoms of diabetes or the complications of diabetes 
may be ignored and assumed as personality traits. Loud 
aggression may be a symptom of low blood glucose for 
example
Physical health
• Toilet training is a skill learnt at an early age and so is 
not lost initially but the person may have difficulty in 
completing the tasks with going to the toilet, resulting in 
apparent incontinence
Cognitive ability (What can I still do, what do I find 
difficult)?
• Support self-care (or care given by their partner) as long 
as possible (e.g. testing blood glucose, injecting insulin). 
Review self-care ability regularly
• Ask the GP to simplify medication regimes and tablet 
load, preferably once daily
• Ask the pharmacist about tools to support self-medication 
such as blister packs. However, these are not helpful in 
people who have no awareness of time or day
Biography (life story)
• Some people may have had diabetes for a long timeImportant points to consider when developing per -
son-centred care plans for people with diabetes 
and dementia: Keeping me safe
• Agree appropriate blood glucose levels with FICHS GP 
or diabetes specialist team. This should avoid the risk of 
low blood glucose levels (hypoglycaemia) but also avoid 
glucose levels being so high that symptoms of high blood 
glucose affect day to day living (such as tiredness, thirst, 
frequency of urination)
• Be vigilant for signs and symptoms of low blood glucose 
for resident prescribed insulin or medications (e.g. 
gliclazide) with a risk of hypoglycaemia. Know how to 
treat hypos, and ensure appropriate treatments are 
available 
• If they are still able to inject insulin but are forgetful, the 
carer can keep it in a locked box until it is needed
 507.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA 7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
Environment
• Meals should be provided in a calm and distraction 
free environment – care homes may want to consider 
protected mealtimes
• Encourage a nourishing diet that provides sufficient 
energy and protein to maintain optimal body weight 
and functional status which fits the person’s usual meal 
pattern. Smaller portions of items in their familiar diet 
optimise nutrition, rather  than completely removing 
foods or making considerable changes to eating patterns
• Verbal and non-verbal communication: use calm tone 
when speaking, use short sentences with small amounts of 
information, make time for the person to answer, maintain 
eye contact
Nutrition
• Residents living with diabetes should eat a healthy 
balanced diet which includes some starchy carbohydrates 
at each meal. It is unnecessary to completely avoid simple 
sugars (e.g. puddings, cakes, sweets, chocolate) from 
residents’ diet, however caution should be exercised 
when considering frequency and portion sizes of these 
foods
Barriers to healthy eating in people with diabetes 
and dementia include the following: Nutrition 
barriers
• Memory problems – Forget to eat meals or forget that 
they have already eaten
• Agnosia – May not recognise food, cutlery, or even those 
caring for them
• Dysphasia – Unable to say they are hungry or feel “hypo” 
(have low blood glucose)
• Dysphagia – Problems chewing and swallowing
• Dyspraxia – Can impair people’s ability to prepare food 
and to use utensils
• Executive Dysfunction – Impacts on the ability to plan the 
preparation of food and/or drinks
Training
• It is important for care home staff to receive training 
about diabetes care in dementia. Improving the 
knowledge base builds respect and trust between care 
staff and residents. By being more informed, staff are 
better equipped to provide excellence in diabetes care, 
support and show understanding. To assist with diabetes 
care tasks such as checking blood glucose levels, you may 
need additional training. With better understanding staff 
can support a resident and their family to understand 
their condition, which can make them feel more in control, 
which may lead to a better quality of life. 

7.4. Emotional support
SUPPORTING RESIDENTS
Residents with dementia and diabetes may be more at risk of 
depression and anxiety due to the many challenges associated 
with living with these conditions. Often there are changes in 
the dynamics and relationships with the person and their family 
and friends. People living with diabetes often experience 
social stigma attached to the condition, with people placing 
blame believing their condition was self-inflicted by poor 
lifestyle choices. These factors can have a significant impact on 
emotional wellbeing. It is important to listen to the resident. 
If you notice a change in someone’s mood, or if they mention 
feeling depressed or anxious, encourage them to share their 
concerns and consider if professional support and counselling 
may be appropriate.
If appropriate, consider suggesting diabetes peer support 
and/or group education. Group education/peer sessions offer 
advice and support from professionals and people who have 
lived with the condition for a long time.
53 527.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA 7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA

557.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES 54 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM7.0. DIABETES AND DEMENTIA
7.5. Practical support
Offering practical support to residents living with dementia 
and diabetes may be determined by scope of practice and job 
role. However, expanding your knowledge-base regardless of 
your role will be helpful for your understanding to share with 
residents, their family and friends.
Where appropriate, you should encourage, enable and 
support residents to self-manage their diabetes. Daily diabetes 
management will involve a careful balance between food, 
medication, physical activity and blood glucose monitoring (for 
insulin/sulfonylurea dependent residents) and symptoms of 
dementia can make this increasingly difficult.
Early-onset of dementia, residents may still be able to manage 
daily tasks by following simple, regular routines by adopting 
strategies to remember e.g. written reminders, or timed alarms 
for blood glucose monitoring and or medications. As disease 
progression ensues, daily self-management may become 
increasingly challenging and care home staff  may need to 
support residents with these tasks. 
When supporting residents to complete daily tasks, make sure 
to ask their permission to assist them and if possible support 
them to do it themselves. Remember, even if residents are 
unable to do the task independently, they can still be involved 
to a certain degree. For example, with supervision, they may 
be able to perform their own  finger prick test or observe with 
discussion.
It can be difficult for residents with dementia to relinquish their 
independence and accept support from others. In addition, 
they may not remember why they need an insulin injection or 
have their finger prick test and often become fearful of the 
invasiveness. If resistance occurs with diabetes care, reassure 
the resident by validating their feelings, keep a calm tone 
and demeanor and explain what you are doing and why it is 
important. If the resident becomes agitated or upset, give them 
space, allow them to calm down before approaching again to 
complete the task.BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING
Blood glucose levels that are very low (hypoglycaemia - see 
section 9) or very high (hyperglycaemia - see section 10) may 
cause further damage to the brain. If a person with diabetes has 
dementia, they will need increasing support in monitoring and 
managing their blood glucose levels. A resident with dementia 
will find it difficult to identify symptoms of high or low blood 
glucose, furthermore this is compounded by an inability to 
articulate to care staff if they are experiencing symptoms. Staff 
supporting a person with dementia and diabetes need to learn 
how to recognise the signs and symptoms (see relevant sections 
above) and know what treatment is required. Some residents 
with diabetes may need to check their blood glucose levels 
daily or several times a day, particularly if they use insulin. 
SUPPORTING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Residents with diabetes and dementia should be encouraged 
and supported to continue physical activity for as long as 
possible. Where physical activity is encouraged and maintained 
in the early stages of dementia, it is more likely to be 
maintained as the condition progresses. Care should be taken 
if a resident hasn’t been physically active for some time, and 
their FICHS GP should be consulted prior to implementing any 
exercise regime. To avoid risk of injury, ensure good supervision 
is available and that the person wears appropriate clothes. 
Good foot care is very important for people with diabetes, 
so the person should wear appropriate footwear for physical 
activity and should regularly visit a podiatrist. Participation in 
physical activity will affect the person’s blood glucose level, and 
if the person uses insulin or sulfonylureas, increasing physical 
activity may increase their risk of a hypo: 
• Before doing any physical activity the person’s blood 
glucose level (for residents on hypo-inducing medications) 
should be checked
• If blood glucose is low, they will need to eat something 
before they start the activity to avoid  hypoglycaemia
• After finishing the activity, check blood glucose levels 
again
• If a hypo does occur, this should be treated promptly
• Caution should also be taken with physical activity if blood 
sugar levels are very high (more than 15 mmol/L)

578.0. DIABETES AND FOOT CARE
568.0. DIABETES AND FOOT CARE
8.0. 
Diabetes and 
foot care
8.1. Essentials of foot care
8.2. Toe nail cutting 
8.3. Diabetic foot problems & urgent care8.1. Diabetes and  
foot care
8.2. Toe nail cutting Chronic, poorly controlled blood glucose levels may cause 
problems with blood supply for residents living with diabetes, 
placing them at an increased risk of developing complications 
with their lower limbs, including foot ulcers and amputations.
(Retrieved from: www.diabetes.org.uk/guide-to-diabetes/
complications/feet/taking-care-of-your-feet). 
Diabetes is the most common cause of lower limb amputations 
and in England there are approximately 135 amputations per 
week amongst people with diabetes (Diabetes UK, 2015).
It is important therefore that residents’ feet are checked every 
day to prevent complications such as ulcers and amputations 
from developing.
It is advised that a HCPC (Health and Care Professionals 
Council) registered Podiatrist perform routine nail treatment 
regularly, for example nail care, callus and corn treatments. If 
staff have any concerns about a resident’s nails please discuss 
with FICHS GP as a referral to one of the hospital podiatrists 
may be required.

58 59
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES
8.0. DIABETES AND FOOT CARE 8.0. DIABETES AND FOOT CARE
8.3. Essentials of foot care
1. Feet washing  
• Ensure resident’s feet are washed daily with soap and 
water, unless directed otherwise, and  carefully dried. 
The temperature of the water should be checked before 
feet are washed to ensure it is not too hot. Residents with 
reduced sensation in their feet because of nerve damage 
may not be able to feel the temperature of the water 
which may cause damage to the feet and burns to the skin 
2. Inspect feet  
• Check feet daily. Remove footwear and socks or 
stockings/tights and inspect each foot, including the toes 
and heels
• Look for any breaks or cuts in the skin. Check for any hard 
areas of skin or calluses
• DO NOT use any ‘over the counter’ or chemical 
treatments for callus removal on residents’ feet with 
diabetes. Please seek advice from a HCPC (Health and 
Care Professionals Council) registered podiatrist on how to care for these
• Check to see if there are any changes in the colour of the 
skin, i.e., do both feet look the same colour, are there any 
areas of redness or discolouration
• Check to see if there are any changes with the 
temperature of the feet, i.e., does one foot feel cooler or 
warmer than the other
3. Sensation in the feet  
• Ask the resident if they have any pain/discomfort in their 
feet or any changes in the sensation in the feet, which 
may be new symptoms, or an existing problem which may 
be getting worse
• Be aware that some residents may not have full 
sensation in their feet if they have nerve damage due to 
diabetes. These residents are more at risk of developing 
complications with their feetBelow is a guide identifying what problems to look out for 
which might indicate residents have problems with the nerves 
or blood supply to their feet:
NB. When caring for residents’ feet, look out for the following.
Damage to resident nerves might be indicated by:
• Tingling sensation; pins and needles
• Pain (burning)
• Sweating less
• Feet that are red and hot to touch
• Changes to the shape of your feet
• Loss of feeling in your feet/legs
• Hard skin
Damage to residents’ blood supply might be indicated by:
• Cramp in your calves (at rest or when walking)
• Shiny smooth skin
• Loss of hair on your legs and feet
• Cold, pale feet
• Changes in the skin colour of your feet
• Pain in your foot/feet
• Swollen feet
• Wounds or sores that do not heal
• When caring for your feet, what sort of problems If you notice any of these things, or have any concerns about 
your feet, tell your GP or diabetes team – do not wait until your 
annual foot check! 
 
(Retrieved from: www.diabetes-resources-production.s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/diabetes-storage/2017-08/What%20
to%20Expect_A5%20leaflet.pdf) 
4. Footwear  
• Make sure that residents DO NOT walk around with bare 
feet.
• Ensure their footwear fits correctly. Make sure this is not 
too tight or too loose, is secure and not going to cause 
the resident to trip or fall
• Check that the linings within each item of footwear are 
not loose or torn as these may cause friction against the 
resident’s feet
• If residents have problems getting conventional footwear 
to fit, please liaise with the resident’s GP or podiatrist as 
they may need referring to an orthotist for the provision 
of specialist footwear
• Avoid using hot water bottles or electric blankets/heat 
pads on residents’ feet. If they have reduced sensation in 
their feet due to nerve damage they will not feel if they 
are burning the skin
The following steps are recommended as part of everyday foot 
care for residents with diabetes:
 608.0. DIABETES AND FOOT CARE 8.0. DIABETES AND FOOT CARE
8.3. Diabetic foot 
problems & urgent care
If residents have any of the following refer to their FICHS GP 
immediately as they will need to be seen within 24 hours:
• Broken area(s) of skin
• New foot ulcer
• Hot, red, painful or swollen foot or skin which has become 
discoloured
• Sudden reduced sensation or absent foot pulses
• Sudden onset of severe pain in the leg or foot
Every resident with diabetes should have an annual check of 
their feet, either by their GP , Practice Nurse or community 
podiatrist. If a resident is considered to be at moderate or high 
risk of developing foot problems by the health care professional 
who has undertaken the diabetic foot check they will need to 
be reviewed more frequently. 
For more information about diabetes and foot care visit the 
following link www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng19/ifp/chapter/
About-this-information.  
In addition, further details about diabetic foot problems are 
also available from NICE guideline NG19 (2015c).  
Please follow this link to access NICE guideline NG19 (2015c): 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng19The following recommendations are taken from Diabetes 
UK and include details about what should be included in the 
diabetic foot check:
CHECK LIST
An annual foot check should involve the following:
1. You should be asked to remove any footwear, including 
socks/stockings
2. Your feet should be examined – including looking for 
corns, calluses and changes in shape
3. Your feet should be tested for numbness or changes in 
sensation (neuropathy) with a tuning fork or a fine plastic 
strand called a monofilament
4. You should be asked questions about your feet and 
diabetes management, including:
5. Have you noticed any problems or changes (e.g., cuts, 
blisters, broken skin or corns)?
• Have you had any previous foot problems or wounds?
• Have you experienced any pain or discomfort?
• How often do you check your feet, and what do you look 
for?
• Do you have any cramp-like pains when walking?
• How well are you managing your diabetes?
6. our footwear should also be examined to make sure it is 
not causing any problems to your feet.
7. At the end of the foot check, you should be told the 
results and level of risk of foot problems.
8. You should be given information about what your level of 
risk means and what to do next, including:
• Advice about how to care for your feet - according to your 
level of risk
• An agreed management/treatment plan
• Emergency contact details
• Referral to Foot Protection Service when appropriate 
Retrieved from: https://www.diabetes.org.uk/
resources-s3/2017-09/What-to-expect-at-annual-foot-check.
pdf 
KEY POINTS:
• Residents with diabetes are at risk of developing foot 
problems, including foot ulcers which can lead to 
amputations
• Check the resident’s feet daily without socks/tights for any 
changes/complications
• Residents with diabetes should have an annual diabetic 
foot check with a registered health care professional 
(usually a Practice Nurse or Community Specialist Nurse)
• To avoid complications, residents with diabetes should not 
walk around with bare feet
FOUNTAINS INTEGRATED CARE HOMES SERVICE DIABETES CARE GUIDELINES
9.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPOGL YCAEMIA (LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE) 9.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPOGL YCAEMIA (LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE)
629.0. 
Management of 
hypoglycaemia (low blood glucose)
9.1. Signs & symptoms of hypoglycaemia
9.2. What causes hypoglycaemia? 
9.3. How to treat hypoglycaemia
9.4. Swallowing difficulties
9.5. Using a hypo box9.0. Management of hypoglycaemia 
(low blood glucose)
Hypoglycaemia or a ‘hypo’ means a 
low blood glucose level of 4mmols or 
less (we use the term ‘four is the floor’). 
This is too low to provide sufficient 
energy for some of the body’s functions  
(Diabetes UK, 2010 & IDF, 2013).
In older adults, hypoglycaemia can often 
be more difficult to spot. Residents 
sometimes lose their awareness that 
they are having a hypoglycaemic 
episode. If a hypo goes undetected, 
it may have fatal consequences. 
Hypoglycaemia is one of the most 
important complications which care 
home staff need to be vigilant for that 
can affect older adults with diabetes 
(IDOP , 2014).Healthcare professionals caring for 
older adults with diabetes should assess 
each resident’s risk of hypoglycaemia 
individually and document this in their 
diabetes passpot/care plan, including a 
recommended blood glucose range to 
minimise the risk of developing hypos 
(IDF, 2013). This is particularly important 
for residents who are on insulin or 
medications including sulphonylureas 
such as gliclazide (IDF,2013).
In addition, it is recommended that 
blood glucose levels below 6mmols 
should be avoided to minimise the risk 
of developing hypos (Diabetes UK, 2010 
& IDF, 2013).A HbA1c of less than 53mmol/mol 
should be used as a flag of possible 
overtreatment with medications and a 
review of the resident’s medicines may 
be required by the FICHS GP (IDF, 2013).
In the event of a severe hypoglycaemic 
episode, this should trigger an 
immediate detailed diabetes review 
including a structured medicine and 
dietary review (IDF, 2013). Please contact 
the resident’s FICHS GP to assess the 
resident.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM
 659.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPOGL YCAEMIA (LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE)
(TREND UK (2011) & Diabetes UK – accessed at: www.diabetes.
org.uk/Guide-to-diabetes/[SECTION-COMPLICATIONS] Complications/Hypos-Hypers) 
Residents who have been living with diabetes for many 
years may not always present with the early warning signs of 
hypoglycaemia listed above. For these residents, symptoms of 
hypoglycaemia may not present until their blood glucose levels 
fall to around 3mmols or below and for some, may not have any 
symptoms of hypoglycaemia at all.
When a resident shows any early or late symptoms of 
hypoglycaemia, please check their blood glucose levels immediately. If their reading is below 4mmol, regardless of the 
presence of symptoms, the resident should receive immediate 
treatment. 
NB. Hypoglycaemia will not self-correct and will require 
appropriate intervention from care home staff to treat. See 
Section 9.3 for recommended treatments of hypoglycaemia.
It is suggested that any resident who is treated with insulin 
or sulphonylurea tablets e.g., gliclazide, should have a 
hypoglycaemia management plan (IDF, 2013) with details of the 
individualised target blood glucose levels, monitoring guidance 
and preferred hypo treatments.
SHAKING
SWEATING FEELING TIREDHEADACHES TINGLING IN LIPS AND/OR 
FINGERS SUDDENLY FEELING  
VERY HUNGRY
BLURRED VISION9.1. Signs & symptoms 
of hypoglycaemia
Usually when the blood glucose levels start to drop below 
4mmols, physiological changes occur within the body and 
symptoms usually start to develop. The following signs 
and symptoms may be recognised if a resident is having a 
hypoglycaemic event:9.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPOGL YCAEMIA (LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE)
9.2. What causes 
hypoglycemia? 
There are several factors which may lead to a hypoglycaemic event, 
the list below outline some examples:
• Certain medications including: insulin, gliclazide, nateglanide 
and repaglinide
• Tightly controlled diabetes and blood glucose levels.
• Alcohol
• Missed or delayed meals
• Erratic eating
• Poor/reduced oral nutritional intake
• People with malabsorption or swallowing issues
• Insufficient carbohydrate with meals
• Meals not timed to coincide with glucose lowering therapy 
e.g., NOT giving insulin injections to coincide with meals (NOT 
applicable with once daily long-acting insulin such as Lantus or 
Levemir)
• Exercise/unusual activity (which can include walking/wandering 
and other activities offered in care homes).
• Kidney impairment
• Liver impairment
• Cognitive impairment
• Heat e.g., if the weather is warm or if residents are sitting in a 
hot room or near a radiator
It is recommended that a regular review of residents’ medications is 
undertaken to identify and minimise the use of medicines which can 
cause hypoglycaemia (Diabetes UK, 2010).
If residents are having dietary or swallowing problems and 
experiencing episodes of hypoglycaemia please ensure the 
appropriate healthcare professional (i.e. dietitian/speech and 
language therapist/diabetes specialist nurse) are involved in 
reviewing these residents.INITIAL/EARLY WARNING SIGNS
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE VISIT WWW.HEALTHBOXCIC.COM
9.4. Swallowing 
difficulties
If a resident is experiencing swallowing difficulties or unable to 
swallow and has a deteriorating level of consciousness, please 
DO NOT give any treatments orally. If staff are trained,the 
resident should be placed in the recovery position and an 
intramuscular injection of glucagon may be administered. In the 
event that staff are not trained to administer glucagon, dial 
999 and ask for urgent paramedic assistance.
In the event a resident experiences severe hypoglycaemia, 
this should trigger a comprehensive diabetes review, including 
structured medicines management and dietary review (IDF, 
2013). Contact the FICHS GP if a resident has more than one 
hypoglycaemic episode, to review possible underlying causes 
and to review medications. I f a resident is prescribed insulin 
and has had a hypoglycaemic episode, please DO NOT stop 
administering insulin unless you have been advised to do so 
by a FICHS GP or specialist health care provider e.g. Diabetes 
Specialist NUrse or Diabetologist Consultant. The insulin 
dosage may need to be adjusted rather than discontinued, 
however always seek specialist advice before altering any 
regimen.
679.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPOGL YCAEMIA (LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE) 9.0. MANAGEMENT OF HYPOGL YCAEMIA (LOW BLOOD GLUCOSE)
9.3. How to treat 
hypoglycaemia
STEP ONE
It is recommended that 15-20g of fast acting carbohydrates 
are required to treat a hypoglycaemic event (TREND UK, 2011). 
Suitable treatments include:
• 100ml of LucozadeTM ** (see note below)
• Small NON-DIET fizzy drink (approx. 150ml)
• 200ml (a small carton) of smooth fresh orange juice, NOT 
orange cordial or diluted squash drinks
• Five or six dextrose tablets
• Four large jelly babies
• Seven to eight large jelly beans
• One to two tubes of glucose gel (Glucogel), usually 
prescribed by GP
**Check the label of Lucozade for nutritional content of 
carbohydrate per 100ml. If the label states carbohydrate per 
100ml, 17.8g gives the resident 100mls of Lucozade. If the 
label states carbohydrate per 100ml, 8.9g gives the resident 
200mls of Lucozade (just over half a bottle).
The above treatments may only be used if the resident can 
swallow. Please DO NOT give residents any of the above 
treatments if they cannot swallow or have swallowing difficulties 
as they may choke. Residents who are known to have 
swallowing difficulties will need to be referred to the dietetic 
team if they are at risk of hypoglycaemia to discuss suitable 
hypo treatments. The choice of hypo treatment for each 
resident should be documented in their care plan and medical 
case notes and staff should be aware of this.STEP TWO
After one of the above recommended treatments has been 
given, recheck the resident’s blood glucose again after 10-15 
minutes. If the blood glucose level remains below 4mmols 
repeat one of the above hypo treatments again but only if the 
resident can swallow. Recheck the resident’s blood glucose 10-
15 minutes after each cycle of hypo treatment.
If a resident has been given several of the above hypo 
treatments over a 45-minute period and the blood glucose 
level remains below 4 mmol, please dial 999 and ask for 
urgent paramedic assistance.
STEP THREE
If, however, the resident’s blood glucose does come up above 
4 mmol within 45 minutes of giving one of the recommended 
hypo treatments as indicated in Step 1, ensure the resident is 
then given some starchy food to keep the blood glucose levels 
stable. Examples of starchy food includes:
• A banana
• Half a sandwich or a piece of toast
• 2 plain biscuits
If the next meal is due give this to the resident early
Residents should NOT be given any of the following to treat 
a hypo:
• Chocolate
• Cakes
• Biscuits
• Milky sugary drinks or any other foods or drinks which 
may have a combination of sugar and fat combined within 
them
The fat contained within these foods/drinks will prevent the 
sugar from being released and if these are given this will cause 
the resident’s blood glucose to continue to fall and the hypo 
will take longer to treat. This may result in serious consequences 
and the resident may require admission to hospital.