Diabetes mellitus and insulin use
in adult social care
Page last updated: 28 September 2023
Categories:Organisations we regulate
[SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin is a hormone that helps to regulate metabolism and
lower blood glucose levels.
It is most often prescribed for patients with type 1 diabetes. It is sometimes also used to treat
type 2 diabetes when other methods have been unable to control blood glucose levels.
Many different insulin preparations are available in the UK. There are 3 main groups of insulins:
[SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin is usually given by sub-cutaneous injection. There are many devices available for
administering insulin. These are often designed to make it easier for patients and carers to
administer.
[SECTION-CAREPLANNING] Care planningfast-acting
intermediate-acting
long-acting.7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 1/8

You should have a person-centred care plan for anyone using insulin. This should be reviewed
regularly and when people’s needs change.
This should include:
Monitoring blood glucose levels
Some people can do this for themselves. Where they do this, it must be:an assessment of the support a person may need to manage their diabetes care, including
who will administer insulin
clear information on the person responsible for all aspects of care
the details of the person(s) responsible for providing any specialist support
information on the device and the correct equipment needed
information to support safe administration of insulin, for example rotation of
administration site, and safe use and disposal of device and equipment
information about blood glucose level monitoring, including the frequency and acceptable
range and who will carry out this monitoring
what to do if blood glucose levels are outside of the acceptable range
the signs and symptoms for low or high blood glucose levels and the appropriate
treatment
when to seek support from the GP, community nurses, diabetes team, or emergency
services
any person-centred dietary requirements
any person-centred cultural requirements.
risk assessed
reviewed at regular intervals
reviewed if the person’s condition changes.7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 2/8

Blood glucose levels will determine whether insulin doses need to change and by how much.
[SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin doses may vary for people whose diabetes is difficult to control. Their blood glucose
levels will determine how many units they take each time.
There are different types of blood glucose testing kits, which vary in how they are set up and
used. Care home staff should have a process to ensure that these are calibrated and fit for
purpose in line with the manufacturer’s guidance.
Flash glucose monitoring
Some people monitor their blood glucose levels using a flash glucose monitor. This small sensor
is worn just under the skin and records glucose levels continuously throughout the day and
night.
Whenever necessary, people can scan the sensor to check their blood glucose level.
Staff should be trained and competent to use and support people to use a flash monitor.
Administering insulin
Self-administration
Some people will be able to administer their own insulin.
You need to carry out a risk assessment and record the risk to check that the person can do this
safely. Although some people may be able to administer their insulin, they may need support
with dialling the correct dose. You must record any support you give with medicines. Ensure the
risk assessment includes person-centred medicines support to maximise a person’s ability to
self-administer. If a person is unable to manage any part of administering their insulin, nurses or
trained care staff should administer.
Only trained and competent staff should be responsible for administering insulin or monitoring
blood glucose levels. Where a person’s diabetes care is stable, a care worker could complete
these activities as a delegated task in accordance with national guidance.7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 3/8

Care staff must receive specialist training to administer insulin as a delegated task. They should
be assessed as competent to administer insulin to the named person or people.
Find out more about delegating medicines administration.
Records need to show how much insulin has been given on each occasion. District or
community nurses may keep their own records. Care home staff must have a system of
ensuring that information regarding insulin administered by district nurses or community
nurses is available at the point of transfer of care.
Rotating injection sites
Staff need to rotate and record the injection site to avoid lipohypertrophy. This is also known as
lipos - hard lumps that can form if you inject the same place too often.
Common injection sites include upper arms, thighs, buttocks, and abdomen.
Accessories
A variety of hypodermic needles, syringes, lancets, and other accessories can help with
administering and monitoring insulin. They are usually available on prescription.
Disposable insulin pens and insulin cartridges for re-usable pens should only be administered
using the pen device with the appropriate needle.
Never use a syringe to extract insulin from pen devices or cartridges. This can lead to serious
errors. Find out more in this NHS Patient Safety Alert.
If using insulin from a vial, always measure insulin with an appropriate insulin syringe (marked in
units/mL).
Disposal
Dispose of sharps in a suitable container and arrange to dispose of these containers
appropriately. If visiting healthcare professionals are administering the insulin, ensure there is
an agreement regarding the disposal of sharps.7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 4/8

Find out more about handling sharps in adult social care.
Low blood glucose - hypoglycaemia
[SECTION-INSULIN] Insulin can cause low blood glucose levels (hypoglycaemia). The timing of insulin administration
and meals is important. It helps to avoid fluctuations in blood glucose levels.
Be aware of the symptoms of low blood glucose levels. They can include:
If severe, it can lead to convulsions, loss of consciousness, coma and death.
A person-centred care plan should identify:
Some people might need to use emergency ‘rescue’ medicine or food to increase their glucose
levels. For example, oral glucose or glucagon injection.
Care staff should have access to information about hypoglycaemia management.
High blood glucose - hyperglycaemia
There are several reasons why high blood glucose levels (hyperglycaemia) may happen. For
example, if a person:hunger
anxiety or irritability
palpitations
sweating
tingling lips.
the symptoms of a low blood glucose level
the actions to take if a person’s levels are low.7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 5/8

High blood glucose levels can cause diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), which needs urgent treatment.
The person’s care plan should specify:
Managing complications of diabetes
People with diabetes can be more at risk of additional complications such as kidney, foot, and
eye problems.
Care home staff should regularly examine the feet of people with diabetes and ensure there are
measures to prevent pressure sores.
It is recommended that each person is registered with an optometrist and is offered regular eye
tests.
Storing insulin
If not stored correctly, insulin products can lose their effectiveness. As insulin is a protein, it may
break down if frozen or left out of the fridge for longer than the manufacturer specifies.
Medicines stored in a fridge should be between 2ºC and 8ºC.
Find out more about storing medicines in a fridge.has missed a dose of medicine
has eaten more carbohydrate than the body or medicines (or both) can process
is stressed
is unwell from an infection
has been over-treated for low blood glucose levels.
what blood sugar levels are appropriate for them
the actions to take if their levels are high.7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 6/8

Once the insulin is in use, it can usually be stored at room temperature for a limited period.
Record the date when you first open or use an insulin product. This helps when checking how
long the insulin has been out of the fridge. For detailed information, refer to the patient
information leaflet for each product.
Labelling
Some multi packs of insulin pens are supplied in boxes labelled with the person’s name.
Sometimes the supplying pharmacist will label the individual pens. If individual pens are not
labelled, make sure it is clear who the insulin pens belong to.
Accurate recording
When prescribing, transcribing, or recording insulin, do not abbreviate the word 'unit'. Always
write it in full. Abbreviations (such as ‘u’) can be confused with a zero (particularly if handwritten).
This could lead to serious harm.
This page is for:
Find out more
Medicines: information for adult social care services
For further advice, contact medicines.enquiries@cqc.org.ukadult social care services7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 7/8

© Care Quality Commission 2025See also
Diabetes UK
[SECTION-DELEGATION] Delegating medicines administration
Storing medicines in fridges in care homes
NHS Patient safety alert: Risk of severe harm and death due to withdrawing insulin from pen
devices
Handling sharps in adult social care7/26/25, 2:10 PM Diabetes mellitus and insulin use in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/diabetes-insulin-use 8/8