Diabetes - type 1:
How should I diagnose type 1 diabetes in an
adult?
Last revised in December 2024
The content on the NICE Clinical Knowledge Summaries site (CKS) is the copyright ofClarity Informatics Limited (trading
as Agilio Software Primary Care) (https://agiliosoftware.com/primary-care/). By using CKS, you agree to the licence set
out in theCKS End User Licence Agreement (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-conditions/cks-end-user-licence-
agreement).Diagnose type 1 diabeteson clinical grounds in adults presenting with
hyperglycaemia (random plasma glucose more than 11 mmol/L), bearing in mind that
adults with type 1 diabetes typically (but do not always) have one or more of the
following:
Ketosis.
Rapid weight loss.
Age of onset younger than 50 years.
Body mass index (BMI) below 25 kg/m.
Personal and/or family history of autoimmune disease.
Do not discount a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes if an adult presents with a BMI of 25
kg/m or above, or is aged 50 years or older. 
If type 1 diabetes is diagnosed, refer the person immediately (on the same day) to a
diabetes specialist team to confirm the diagnosis and provide immediate care.
Do not routinely measureC-peptide and/or diabetes-specific autoantibody titresto
confirm the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes.
C-peptide and/or diabetes-specific autoantibody titres may be measured (usually in
secondary care) if:
Type 1 diabetes is suspected but the clinical presentation includes some atypical
features (for example age 50 years or older, BMI of 25 kg/m or above, or slow
evolution of hyperglycaemia), or
Type 1 diabetes has been diagnosed and treatment started but there is a clinical
suspicion that the person may have a monogenic form of diabetes, and one or
both tests may guide the use of genetic testing, or 
Classification of diabetes is uncertain and confirming type 1 diabetes would have
implications for availability of treatment, for example continuous subcutaneous
insulin infusion (CSII or 'insulin pump') therapy. 
Basis for recommendation
Show2
2

©NICE (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence)2025. All rights reserved. Subject toNotice of rights
(https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-conditions#notice-of-rights).