SEPTEMBER 2016My diabetes,  
my care
People’s experiences of 
community diabetes care and  
the support they are provided  
to self-manage their condition

 
bMY DIABETES, MY CAREOur purpose 
The Care Quality Commission is the independent regulator of health 
and adult social care in England. We make sure that health and social care services provide people with safe, effective, compassionate, high-
quality care and we encourage care services to improve.
Our role 
 zWe register health and adult social care providers. 
 zWe monitor and inspect services to see whether they are safe, effective, 
caring, responsive and well-led, and we publish what we find, including quality ratings.
 zWe use our legal powers to take action where we identify poor care.
 zWe speak independently, publishing regional and national views of the major quality issues in health and social care, and encouraging improvement by highlighting good practice.
Our values 
Excellence – being a high-performing organisationCaring – treating everyone with dignity and respectIntegrity – doing the right thingTeamwork – learning from each other to be the best we can

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE1MY DIABETES, MY CARE
Contents
FOREWORD ................................................................................................................................. 2
MY EXPERIENCE ......................................................................................................................... 3
SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................. 4
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 6
IDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  ........................................................................................... 8
STRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT ................................. 14
CARE PATHWAY ........................................................................................................................ 21
PERSON-CENTRED CARE COORDINATION ............................................................................. 25
CONCLUSIONS .......................................................................................................................... 31
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................................................................................ 33
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................. 34
APPENDIX: HOW WE CARRIED OUT THE REVIEW  ................................................................. 35

FOREWORD
MY DIABETES, MY CARE
[SECTION-FOREWORD] Foreword
The increase in the number of people with 
diabetes in the last 20 years has been 
unprecedented – the percentage of adults in 
England with diabetes has more than doubled since 1996. This has brought with it a significant cost in terms of people’s health and wellbeing.
It is more important than ever to address the 
rise in Type 2 diabetes and ensure the effective 
care of those with Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes. This includes supporting people with diabetes to 
self-manage and helping those who have been 
identified as at high risk of developing Type 2 
diabetes to become healthier. The stakes are 
high, for the individuals who may experience the devastating consequences of long-term 
poor health and in financial terms for the NHS. 
When diabetes is not well-managed, it can lead to serious complications such as heart 
disease, kidney disease, stroke, amputations, 
and blindness. It is estimated that the NHS spends around £8 billion each year on treating 
these complications – most could be avoided or 
delayed by empowering people with the skills and knowledge to manage their condition.The NHS Five Year Forward View sets out a vision for the future of the NHS, prioritising 
prevention and public health and breaking 
down the traditional divide between primary care, community services and hospitals. In the past decade we have seen how professionals in 
primary care and community settings are able to 
provide most diabetes care outside of hospitals. The NHS Five Year Forward View reaffirms this 
shift of services into the community alongside 
the enabling of people with long-term conditions to take more control of managing their health 
and building integrated care around them.
Improving health and managing resources better 
is at the core of improving quality of care. 
This report shows there is much that is already 
working well for us to learn from and build on in meeting this challenge.
Professor Steve Field CBE – Chief Inspector 
of General Practice, CQC
Chris Askew – Chief Executive, Diabetes UK

 MY EXPERIENCE
PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE
My experience
I was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes seven years 
ago by my GP . It was an emotionally difficult time 
as I was also trying to cope with other serious 
health issues. I was not offered any support or the attention I needed. I also felt that there was an immediate presumption and continuing 
presumption, that it was my fault for having 
developed diabetes, which made me feel even more unsupported.
I didn’t receive the proper tools or education to 
self-manage my condition confidently, and a lot 
of the information I received I had to look up 
myself online.When I was diagnosed, I didn’t know what was 
happening and where to turn to. Healthcare 
professionals need to provide more information 
and support to patients. Whether that is pointing them to diabetes care websites or organisations, or just taking the time to sit them down to 
explain how diabetes will impact their life. We 
need people who are motivated and interested in providing patients joined-up diabetes care that 
makes them feel supported.
Woman with diabetes

SUMMARY
MY DIABETES, MY CARE
[SECTION-SUMMARY] Summary
We conducted this thematic review to improve 
understanding of people’s experience of diabetes 
care across England, and to consider how well 
different care services work together to deliver high-quality diabetes care.
We asked people (aged 18 to 65 years) with Type 
1 and Type 2 diabetes about their experience of 
care. We particularly focused on the experiences 
of people from Black and minority ethnic (BME) populations and people with a learning 
disability, as people in these groups are more 
likely to develop diabetes and have poorer health 
experiences and outcomes.
We visited 10 areas to talk to commissioners, 
providers, and staff about how diabetes care in the community is delivered. We found variation 
in some aspects of care at local level, including 
many examples where diabetes care is working well that we encourage others to learn from.
The review found that most people’s experience 
of community diabetes care is good overall, 
but care and support is not always flexible and responsive enough to meet everyone’s 
individual needs. The extent to which services are 
successfully supporting people to self-manage appears limited. However we found examples 
where commissioners and providers have 
developed approaches that are working well that others can learn from.We found that:
 zMost people we spoke with received the checks recommended by the National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). 
Generally, people told us that they were able to discuss their care with primary care staff and they felt they received good explanations 
about their care.
 zPeople at high risk of developing Type 2 
diabetes were not always identified and 
supported to manage their risk. Several areas 
we visited described ways of engaging with 
individuals and communities to encourage 
uptake of health checks and raise public awareness of diabetes.
 zSome people need more emotional support than they are receiving – both at diagnosis 
and on an ongoing basis. This was not 
always recognised by services or health professionals. This includes those with Type 2 
diabetes where the need might be more than 
previously thought.
 zPeople who had attended structured education courses felt it improved their ability 
and confidence to manage their condition. 
However, the courses were not able to meet everyone’s needs and it was not always clear 
how the education needs of those who had 
not attended were being met.
 zPeople showed a lack of awareness and understanding of their test results. Very few people had a hand-held care plan they could 

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE SUMMARY
5take with them as they moved between 
services.
 zKnowledge of diabetes was often lacking within some staff groups, particularly in 
adult social care, and in some areas diabetes 
training for care workers was absent. This can result in insufficient support for people who 
rely on others to help manage their diabetes.
Community diabetes care can be improved 
through building on what is good and learning from what is already working well, in particular 
where commissioners and services are taking 
a personalised approach that meets individual needs. 
While we found that the care people received 
from services was good overall, the extent to 
which people are supported to successfully self-manage appears limited. This is illustrated by the 
lack of understanding of recent test results and 
treatment targets not being met. When the NHS does not support and empower people to self-
manage their long-term condition it impacts on 
patient experience and on NHS resources. For people with diabetes this may mean that they 
do not have the knowledge and skills to manage 
their condition effectively and are more likely to experience complications as a result. All parts of 
the health and care system need to make self-
care a real priority, for the benefit of patients and the future of the NHS.
CQC encourages health and social care 
commissioners, providers and professionals 
to work together to deliver an approach to diabetes care that puts people at the centre of 
their own care and enables them to improve their 
health and wellbeing and manage their diabetes effectively.
Key components of this approach are:
 zA local plan for improved diabetes care 
through support to self-management.
 zCommissioners and providers engaging with their whole community to increase 
awareness and understanding of diabetes 
and encourage uptake of health checks.
 zProfessionals engaging with people to understand their individual needs and developing a personalised care plan 
together.
 zEmotional support embedded in care for 
people with diabetes.
 zDevelopment of education approaches to ensure everyone, including people from BME 
groups and people with a learning disability, 
can gain the knowledge and skills they need.
 zEvaluation of the effectiveness of structured education and annual review in giving people 
the knowledge and ability to self-manage 
their diabetes.
 zMaking better use of available technology to support self-management through education, 
motivation, and self-monitoring.
 zTraining in diabetes for care workers to 
enable them to fully support and care for 
people with diabetes.
CQC is committed to encouraging improvement 
in diabetes care. CQC will:
 zReview our approach to long-term conditions, including diabetes, as part of 
the development of the next phase of our 
inspections of primary medical services and community health services.
 zSupport our inspection teams to develop their understanding of good and outstanding 
diabetes care.
 zIdentify and share examples of outstanding 
diabetes care from our inspections.
 zInclude data relating to diabetes care in the development of our new insight model 
for monitoring quality and encouraging 
improvement.
 zUse our inspections to encourage providers of adult social care to ensure their staff have 
necessary capacity and capability.

INTRODUCTION
MY DIABETES, MY CARE
[SECTION-INTRODUCTION] Introduction
Diabetes is a lifelong condition that causes a 
person’s blood glucose level to become too high. 
In Type 1 diabetes, the body does not produce 
insulin and glucose levels increase, which can seriously damage the body’s organs. In Type 2 
diabetes, the body does not produce enough 
insulin, or the body’s cells do not react to insulin. Type 2 diabetes is more common in older people 
and is often associated with obesity. In England 
around 90% of adults with diabetes have  Type 2. When diabetes is not well-managed, it can lead to serious complications such as heart 
disease, kidney disease, stroke, amputations, and 
blindness.
Public Health England estimates that nearly 
3.5 million people are living with diabetes in 
England. This figure is predicted to rise to  
4.6 million (9.5% of the population) by 2030.
Approximately £10 billion is spent by the NHS on diabetes each year – 10% of the NHS budget 
for England and Wales.
2 Eighty per cent of these 
financial costs are due to the complications associated with diabetes; these costs are likely to 
grow significantly as the number of people with diabetes increases. The annual cost of diabetes 
is predicted to rise to £40 billion by 2035/36 if 
things continue as they are.
In 2012, the National Audit Office reported that NHS diabetes care was “poor, with low 
achievement of treatment standards, high 
numbers of avoidable deaths.”
3 In their 2015 
progress report, they found that progress had been made “in reducing the additional risk 
of death for people with diabetes” but that “performance in delivering key care processes 
and achieving treatment standards, which help to 
minimise the risk of diabetes patients developing complications in the future, is no longer improving”.
The potential benefit of making these improvements is enormous. We know that, if 
sustained, even modest improvements in blood 
glucose levels can result in huge benefits for people with diabetes. If earlier intervention for 
better controlling blood glucose were applied to 
the UK diabetes population, in the next 25 years almost a million serious medical complications, such as blindness, amputation and kidney failure 
could be avoided and save the NHS £5.5 billion.
Improvements to other aspects of people’s health will also result in fewer complications and 
reduced NHS costs.
CQC supports the strengthened focus on 
improving diabetes prevention as a result of the 
NHS Five Year Forward View. This includes the introduction of the NHS Diabetes Prevention 
Programme that will support people who have 
been identified as at high risk of developing Type 2 diabetes to become healthier. The NHS Five Year Forward View also emphasises better 
enabling of self-management and community 
support for people with diabetes. People need to have the knowledge, skills and support to 
manage their condition, and community-based 

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE INTRODUCTION
7services underpin this. Good diabetes care equips 
people to manage their diabetes, minimises the 
risks of associated complications, and identifies 
and treats complications early when they occur.
About our review
CQC’s Diabetes care pathways thematic data review of hospital admissions highlighted 
that care outcomes for people with diabetes 
are variable and that there are significant variations in diabetes admissions across clinical 
commissioning group (CCG) areas.
This review follows on from the data review. 
The purpose was to improve understanding 
of people’s experience of diabetes care in 
community settings across England, including how well care services deliver high-quality care 
and reduce admissions to hospital. For the 
purposes of this review, ‘community settings’ are defined as any care provided outside of a 
hospital or ambulance setting. The review aimed 
to:
 zUnderstand the experience people with diabetes have of receiving care, and how well 
are they supported by community services to 
achieve good outcomes.
 zHighlight examples of good and outstanding community diabetes care at service and local 
levels.
 zIdentify barriers that prevent people receiving 
high-quality care.
 zMake recommendations for services, providers and commissioners, at local and national 
levels so they can take action to address poor 
care.This review, its findings and recommendations, aim to reflect the experiences of people with 
diabetes. We focused on the experience of adults 
aged 18 to 65 years. We know that younger working age people with Type 1 and Type 2 
diabetes and people with Type 1 diabetes of all 
ages are less likely to receive the health checks or achieve treatment targets recommended by the 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE).
7 Including people aged up to 65 allowed 
us to consider a balance of experiences of people 
with Types 1 and 2 diabetes, in particular how 
primary and community services support those with Type 2 diabetes.
We specifically looked at the experiences of 
people from Black and minority ethnic (BME) 
backgrounds and people with a learning disability. People from South Asian and Black 
communities are two to four times more likely 
to develop Type 2 diabetes than those from white backgrounds.
8 People with a learning 
disability tend to have higher rates of obesity and 
therefore may be at greater risk of developing 
Type 2 diabetes.9 Both of these groups may 
also experience inequalities in their access to 
healthcare.
During the review, we looked at four key aspects 
of care for people with diabetes:
1. Identification and diagnosis
2. Structured education and support for self-
management
3. Care pathway
4. Person-centred care coordination.
For more information on how we carried out the 
review, please see the appendix.

IDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  
MY DIABETES, MY CARE
Identification and 
diagnosis 
KEY FINDINGS
 zPeople at high risk of developing Type 2 diabetes are not always identified and supported to 
manage their risk. Several areas we visited described ways of engaging with individuals and 
communities to encourage uptake of health checks and raise public awareness of diabetes.
 zSome people need more emotional support than they are receiving – at diagnosis and on an 
ongoing basis. This was not always recognised by services or health professionals. This includes 
those with Type 2 where the need might be more than previously thought.
Identification of people at 
high risk of developing Type 2 diabetes
Identifying people who are at high risk of 
developing Type 2 diabetes, and engaging with 
them to help them manage and reduce their 
risk, can delay or prevent the development of diabetes.
NHS Health Checks are one way of identifying 
people at high risk of developing Type 2 
diabetes. The programme is commissioned by local authorities, and provides a check to assess 
risk of heart disease, stroke, kidney disease, 
and diabetes to people aged between 40 and 74 every five years. It is estimated that, if fully implemented, this programme could prevent 4,000 people a year from developing diabetes.
Since 2013, 62% of people in England who are 
eligible for these checks have been offered one.  
However, less than a third (30%) have attended one 
[FIGURE 1] .11
In most of the areas we visited, services and commissioners told us they use NHS Health 
Checks to identify individuals with diabetes or at 
risk of developing diabetes. However, the Health Check programme does not cover all those at 
high risk due to the age limits – for example, 
people from South Asian backgrounds may develop diabetes five to 10 years earlier than 
White Europeans.
PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE IDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  
9FIGURE 1: UPTAKE OF NHS HEALTH CHECKS 2013 TO 2016
People not
offered
People
offered but
not attended
People who
have
attended38%
32%
30%
Data Source: NHS Health Check Data as at 30/08/2016  
Total eligible population: 15,402,612 people. Each icon represents 1%
In several of the areas we visited, GP practices 
used their patient lists to identify people with 
known risk factors for Type 2 diabetes; others 
used routine blood tests when they registered people at the practice. In five CCGs areas, 
registers were used to monitor individuals once 
they were identified as at high risk for developing diabetes. Some CCGs told us that workloads 
could prevent GP practices from undertaking 
proactive identification of risk among their patients.
CCGs told us about barriers to identifying people 
with diabetes or at high risk of developing it. 
These included a lack of public awareness and understanding about diabetes and its risk factors, 
and people’s reluctance to attend health checks 
or go to the doctor about symptoms. Several CCGs said they found it difficult to engage with 
certain groups including young people, transient 
populations or some BME groups where there may be a stigma attached to diabetes.
Half of the CCG areas we visited commissioned 
additional activities to help identify people at risk 
of developing diabetes, such as awareness raising events, with referral to GP for those identified 
as high risk. A few of the areas we visited told us 
about the strategies they use to support users of adult social care to access regular health checks, where risk of diabetes would be picked up. This 
included working with care home staff to make 
sure residents received a health check at their GP practice or at the care home.
COMMUNITY OUTREACH
Slough and South Reading CCGs commissioned Silver Star Diabetes to engage 
with local communities and identify people 
at high risk of developing diabetes. The charity runs mobile diabetes units. These 
travel around to places of work, worship, 
community events, high streets and retail parks discussing risk of diabetes and offering 
lifestyle advice. Through working with Silver 
Star, Slough CCG was also able to identify 1,500 people deemed to be at high risk 
of diabetes and invited them to join an 
intervention programme.
Slough and South Reading CCGs

MY DIABETES, MY CAREIDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  
10When people are identified as at high risk for 
developing diabetes it is crucial to take action. 
Proactive primary care is central to this, as is 
the more systematic use of evidence-based intervention strategies. The NHS Diabetes 
Prevention Programme has been set up to refer 
people at high risk of developing Type 2 diabetes to a behaviour change programme to help reduce 
their risk. The programme starts in 2016 with a 
first wave of 27 areas covering 26 million people, and will roll out to the whole of England by 
2020 with an expected 100,000 referrals each 
year thereafter.
13 Those referred will get help to 
reduce their risk through education on healthy 
eating and lifestyle, help to lose weight and 
bespoke physical exercise programmes, all of which together have been proven to reduce the 
risk of developing diabetes.[SECTION-DIAGNOSIS] Diagnosis of diabetes
It is estimated that there are over 500,000 
people with diabetes in England who have not 
been diagnosed.8 Left unmanaged, serious health 
complications are likely. GP practices register the number of people diagnosed with diabetes 
and report on this through the Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF, an incentive scheme 
for primary care). The gap between estimates 
of the prevalence of diabetes and the number of diagnoses of diabetes recorded through 
QOF suggests that some practices may not be 
diagnosing people with diabetes early enough 
[FIGURE 2] .
FIGURE 2: PREVALENCE OF DIABETES*: RECORDED DIGNOSIS VS. ESTIMATED TOTAL PREVALENCE
0%5%10%15%
2011
2013
20142015 2020 2025 2030Percentage of people with diabetes
YearUncertainty rangeRecorded diagnoses
Estimated prevalence
Data Sources: Registered prevalence: Quality Outcomes Framework (QOF), 2014-15 estimated GP list size: 45,737,325 people  
Estimated prevalence Association of Public Health Observatories and Public Health England Diabetes Prevalence Model  
*people aged 16+ yrs (APHO) and 17+ yrs (QOF).

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE IDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  
11The CCGs we visited used a range of methods to 
identify GP practices with lower than expected 
recorded prevalence. Most commonly, CCGs 
told us they used data from QOF to identify practices that appeared to be performing less 
well. Several CCGs told us that diabetes specialist 
nurses would support the services to increase identification; such as holding learning events or 
pairing practices with well performing peers.
Most people we spoke with during our fieldwork 
reported a positive experience of their diagnosis overall. People told us they received useful 
information about the condition and how to 
manage it. However, people who responded to our online feedback form indicated that 
the quality of support offered at the point 
of diagnosis was mixed: some received good support while others only received the most 
basic information without any discussion of their 
concerns.
The most common approach we found for 
informing people about their diagnosis was 
to have an initial appointment with the GP, 
followed by a longer appointment with a nurse to provide more information about diabetes and 
its treatment. Health professionals stated the 
importance of giving people enough time to understand the information they were receiving. 
One GP practice in Rushcliffe CCG saw people 
three times within the first six weeks following diagnosis to make sure they had enough time to understand and come to terms with their diagnosis.
“The diabetes nurse in my practice is 
excellent in helping me manage my diabetes. So much so it is fully under control in under six months. She also listens to me which helps very much.”
Man with Type 2 diabetes
A few of the areas we visited noted that they 
provide information that is suitable and relevant 
to patients from different BME communities 
and people with a learning disability. We saw a good example in one area of a consultation 
with a diabetes specialist nurse and dietician. 
The patient was supported to understand and manage their condition through interpretation 
provided by the dietician who was Urdu-
speaking, use of diagrams and translated written information. The discussion regarding diet and 
food choices reflected a South Asian diet.
Some people, for example those with a learning 
disability, may require additional support to understand and manage their diabetes, including 
at the time of diagnosis. This support can come 
from family members, care staff, or others.  When this support is lacking it can impact on the 
person, as illustrated in the example.
One person with a learning disability told us about her shock when she was first told she had to 
use an insulin pen. She was phoned by her GP and was asked to come in that afternoon to see the 
nurse, but was unable to organise a support worker to accompany her at short notice. She and her 
support worker felt the training offered during the meeting was inadequate. The support worker subsequently arranged for a district nurse to come in and explain how to use the pens after talking 
to the GP surgery. The woman was anxious and distressed while recalling these events.
“When I was first diagnosed, that was bad care, when they just dumped the insulin on me, that 
was bad care. They could have at least explained it to me, because I tried to get out of it. I tried 
to say ‘Well can’t you wait till…’ and I tried to get support but I couldn’t, because it’s such short 
notice. That was the worst part, they just dumped it on me like that.”
Woman with Type 2 diabetes 

MY DIABETES, MY CAREIDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  
12ADDITIONAL SUPPORT WHEN REQUIRED
We heard how multiple professionals and agencies in Liverpool worked together to provide 
personalised support at the time of diagnosis for people who needed it. This could include 
community matrons and mental health teams, supported by food workers and health trainers if 
required. Social care workers were aligned to each neighbourhood area to make sure that no one who needed support was overlooked. Learning disability nurses also helped to support people 
when diagnosed, sharing information from, and with, diabetes specialist and practice nurses. Staff 
said they would educate the relatives or carer of the person, and would use communication aids including food pictures for people with a learning disability. Staff in Liverpool gave the example 
of one person with a learning disability who had been diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes but found 
it difficult to adapt to the suggested changes in diet and did not follow dietary advice. The person received support from the dietician, and a food worker visited daily for a number of weeks to 
support the person with shopping and preparing meals, until they were confident enough to 
manage their new diet.
Liverpool CCG
A common theme in the experience described by people with both Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes was 
a need for more emotional support, at the time 
of diagnosis and beyond. This includes emotional support from health professionals (who some 
people felt prioritised information over emotional 
well-being) and in some cases a need for access to specialist psychological support. Providing 
emotional support at diagnosis can contribute 
to more effective self-management and increase engagement with services and attendance at 
structured education programmes.
14 The need 
for emotional support for those with Type 1 diabetes is well established. Our findings suggest 
that professionals may not always recognise the emotional needs of those with Type 2 diabetes.
Several people told us about the shock of 
receiving their diagnosis – describing it as 
a “whole life-changing experience” and a “complete bombshell”, particularly for those who believed they were living a healthy lifestyle.“Although I was pre-diabetic for a 
time and knew what was coming in the future, the actual news of becoming a diabetic was shocking. I could have done with some psychological support at this stage.”
Woman with Type 2 diabetes
People felt that it was important to have a health 
professional who listened to their concerns, 
rather than just giving them information. Some 
people suggested that support groups would be helpful. When people do receive emotional 
support from a health professional after their 
diagnosis it can have a profound impact.

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE IDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  
13One person we spoke with said that when she received the diagnosis, “I just wanted to be dead”. 
She reported not wanting to believe she had diabetes and not wanting to take medications, 
particularly insulin, as she was aware of the stigma attached to having diabetes by some people in 
her ethnic group.
She said that her GP was extremely supportive when diabetes was diagnosed and felt her GP was 
the only one she could talk to. She explained that on one occasion, she was walking to the GP 
surgery and thinking about suicide because of the diabetes. 
“The only thing that saved me was the GP . He made me feel like life was worth living, and what 
would happen to my children and husband if I was not here anymore?”
Woman with Type 2 diabetes
Some people may need additional psychological support after their diabetes diagnosis. [SECTION-DIAGNOSIS] Diagnosis 
is an opportunity to make efforts to minimise the 
likelihood of a person developing depression – a condition people with diabetes are at higher 
risk of and one that can impact their ability 
to manage their diabetes.
15,16 Although not 
everyone who is diagnosed with diabetes will 
need specialist psychological support, those who 
do should be able to access it in a timely way.
People we spoke with who had needed and 
accessed specialist psychological support found 
it very helpful. One person told us that the 
specialist counselling service has “been my rock, given me confidence”. In 2015, Diabetes 
UK’s care survey found that only 24% of people 
with diabetes who had needed emotional or psychological support from a specialist 
healthcare professional or service said they were 
offered it 
[FIGURE 3] .17FIGURE 3: PEOPLE OFFERED EMOTIONAL OR 
PSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPORT
24%
76%Yes
No
Data Source: Diabetes UK: Care Survey 2015 Total respondents: 3,000 people

STRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT
MY DIABETES, MY CARE
Structured education 
and support for  self-management
KEY FINDINGS
 zPeople who had attended structured education courses felt it improved their ability and 
confidence to manage their condition. However, the courses were not able to meet everyone’s 
needs and it was not always clear how the education needs of those who had not attended 
were being met.
Structured education 
People’s ability to self-manage is integral to the successful management of diabetes. Self-
management reduces the risk of complications 
and demand on health and care services. Structured education programmes support the 
person and their family members and carers 
in developing skills, knowledge, beliefs and attitudes to self-manage diabetes.
NICE recommends that people should be offered 
a course around the time of diagnosis of Type 2 
diabetes, and six to 12 months after diagnosis for people with Type 1 diabetes, with annual 
reinforcement and review.
18,19
All the CCGs we visited commissioned structured 
education programmes, and most offered courses for people with Type 1 (mostly DAFNEa) 
and Type 2 diabetes (mostly X-PERT Health 
and DESMOND).b However, one CCG only 
commissioned courses for people with Type 2 diabetes, despite NICE recommending that adults 
with Type 1 diabetes who have not undertaken a structured education programme should be 
offered it, regardless of how long they have had 
Type 1 diabetes. Two areas had additional courses that focused specifically on weight loss.
National Diabetes Audit data for 2014/15 shows 
that 78% of people with diabetes aged 18 to 64 
years have been offered a structured education course. This is mirrored by the responses to our 
a. DAFNE: Dose Adjustment For Normal Eating
b. DESMOND: Diabetes Education and Self Management 
for Ongoing and Newly Diagnosed

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE STRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT
15online feedback form in which 75% of people said 
they have been offered a structured education 
course; 61% had attended one. Both our online 
feedback form and Diabetes UK’s 2015 care survey found that people with Type 1 diabetes 
were much more likely to have been offered and 
attended a course than people with Type 2.
In general, people we spoke with who had 
attended structured education courses were very 
positive about their experiences. The majority 
of people (including over 80% of those who responded to our online feedback form) said 
it was helpful in improving their knowledge 
and ability to self-manage. People identified benefits including improved understanding and 
knowledge about their condition (for example 
insulin and medication); improved self-control and management (such as diet and exercise); and the opportunity to discuss concerns and share 
information with other people. However, there 
was a clear theme of people saying that although the courses were helpful, they wanted more 
opportunities to attend refresher sessions.
“I found the course useful and 
informative. I have a much better understanding now and that has helped me to lose weight, increase exercise and I have been able to reduce the amount of medication I need.”
Person with diabetes
A man told us about the treatment and care he had experienced. He said that training was the most 
important aspect, and that completing the structured education course enabled him to successfully 
manage his condition. He spoke highly about the trainers and the support they provided.
His only negative was he had to wait six months to access the training, and was initially anxious 
about the time he would have to spend on the structured education course. He felt the period 
before he completed the DAFNE course left him “in the dark”. However, he could not fault the 
support he received from his GP and practice nurse during this period.
“I would absolutely recommend it to anyone with diabetes Type 1. For me to manage my diabetes 
it’s been vital, I am able to manage my needs well. The trainers in Worcester were fantastic. 
Training was pitched to everyone. If someone wanted me to stand up in front of thousands to 
recommend this course, I definitely would.”
Man with Type 1 diabetes
A PRACTICE LED APPROACH TO STRUCTURED EDUCATIONc
The advanced nurse practitioner at the practice ran X-PERT Diabetes, a six-week structured group-based education programme for people with diabetes. At the time of our inspection, this was the 
only practice in Redditch and Bromsgrove that offered this programme in-house. The GP partners 
supported the programme as they placed a high value on patient education and self-management of long-term conditions. Between 10 and 18 patients attended each week for two and a half hours.
The service was popular with patients and demonstrated improved outcomes including weight loss, 
reduction in HbA1c (blood sugar levels) and cholesterol.
Elgar House Surgery, Worcestershire
c
c. This is an example from our comprehensive inspections. CQC has a toolkit that showcases outstanding practice in GP 
surgeries: www.cqc.org.uk/content/examples-outstanding-practice-gps

MY DIABETES, MY CARESTRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT
16Elgar House Surgery is an example of a GP 
practice inspected by CQC that demonstrates a 
successful practice-led approach.
The most common reason people gave us why 
they had not attended a structured education programme was that the courses clashed with 
other commitments. Several CCGs told us they 
had made efforts to improve the choice of times, dates and venues of the courses to try to increase 
attendance. Four CCGs told us they contacted 
patients who had not attended to understand their reasons and try to address them.
IMPROVING ATTENDANCE AT 
STRUCTURED EDUCATION
People who do not attend session one are contacted to enquire as to the reason 
and whether they would like to re-book. 
People who do not attend all four sessions are contacted by letter and asked to give 
feedback about their non-attendance by an 
anonymous questionnaire so that the service can address any common issues.
Rushcliffe CCGThree of the CCGs we visited tried to improve attendance at the courses by training primary 
care staff to engage more effectively with 
people. This included training practice nurses in motivational interviewing to support people 
to change behaviour and take up offers of 
structured education. In some areas, we heard that practice staff are encouraged to attend the 
structured education courses so that they are 
better able to advise patients on the course and its contents. 
Other areas are developing innovative methods 
of delivering structured education, such as online 
education (see case study below).
Using online methods to deliver structured 
education could be a significant advance in 
getting information about diabetes to those who 
may not attend a course in person. Mobile phone and internet-based interventions have been 
found to support self-management for people 
living with diabetes. Technology can be used to supplement healthcare provider diabetes care 
by providing both educational and motivational 
support. Online learning allows people to work at their own pace wherever they are. Mobile apps 
have added convenience and can give cues and 
feedback through the phone.
IMPROVING ACCESS TO STRUCTURED EDUCATION
In addition to face-to-face educational courses (such as XPERT and DAFNE), the CCG has commissioned a National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) endorsed online 
education programme for people with Type 2 diabetes. The successful implementation of 
Mapmydiabetes was achieved in collaboration with the CCG, Diabetes UK and Mapmyhealth.
The programme supports self-management by providing structured education, information, 
goal-setting and tools to create meal and exercise plans. Healthcare professionals can use 
Mapmydiabetes to support collaborative care-planning, communicate with people and monitor progress. Diabetes specialist nurses and community diabetes dieticians have worked to make sure 
the content of established courses is evidence-based and consistent.
Mapmydiabetes, South Worcestershire CCG

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE STRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT
17Some people told us they did not want to attend 
a course. In some cases it was because they felt 
sufficiently supported by their GP or other health 
professionals. Others in a few CCGs who did want to attend were discouraged by long waiting times 
due to the limited number of places available. In 
one area, hospital doctors were unable to refer people directly. In some cases people were told 
they were only eligible to attend during the first 
year following diagnosis, but felt they were not ready while adjusting to a different lifestyle and 
accepting the diagnosis.
Very few of the people (three out of 20) from 
BME groups that we interviewed in depth had attended a structured education programme. Most 
were unaware of these programmes and had not 
spoken with a health professional about them. Six CCGs told us they delivered structured education 
courses in languages other than English. This 
included employing specialist diabetes educators who spoke other languages and using interpreters 
who are trained in the course curriculum. Several 
CCGs recognised they were not providing courses that were appropriate to their local communities 
– this was echoed by the people who lived there. 
Four CCGs told us of the steps they had taken to make sure that courses were culturally relevant.
IMPROVING CULTURAL 
RELEVANCE OF STRUCTURED 
EDUCATION 
The South Asian Lifestyle Intervention 
Programme was put in place to improve 
access to diet and lifestyle projects for 
Urdu speaking people. This project won the clinical team of the year award in 2014 for 
its outcomes and organisation of a non-
traditional approach.
Slough CCGOn our fieldwork visits we found that structured education was rarely offered to people with 
a learning disability. It was not always clear 
whether people’s education needs had been met through other channels. Only two of the people 
with a learning disability who we interviewed 
in depth said they had been offered access to a course. One did not attend as she did not feel 
able to go on her own and was unable to arrange 
for a support worker to go with her. The other person did not feel the course suited her needs. 
NICE guidance states that for a person unable 
or unwilling to participate in group education, an alternative of equal standard should be 
provided.
18,19 In several areas we found that 
there were no appropriate education programmes for people with a learning disability or cognitive 
impairment, deaf people or people who are hard of hearing.
We saw several good examples where services 
had adapted course materials in order to provide 
structured education content to those for whom the standard courses may not have been suitable. 
One CCG described specific programmes for 
people with a learning disability and their carers, which are delivered with learning disabilities 
health facilitators and community nursing 
teams at day care services. The programme was also available in different languages, including 
sign language. In one CCG, people whose first 
language is not English where group education may not be suitable were offered education on 
an individual basis with the use of an interpreter, 
and given bilingual cards to show to the GP so that an interpreter could be arranged. However, 
these kinds of initiatives and adaptations were 
not always available in the areas we visited. This means that the people the standard courses are 
unsuitable for are often not gaining the benefits 
of increased knowledge and understanding of their condition.
In addition to their efforts to increase attendance 
and cultural relevance of structured education, 
commissioners should prioritise evaluation of the courses in their areas. They should be clear 
on the skills and knowledge they are expecting 
people to gain from the programmes and assure themselves that the courses are delivering better 
health outcomes.

MY DIABETES, MY CARESTRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT
18Ongoing support to help people 
better self-manage
Responses to the July 2016 GP Patient Survey 
show that 84% of people with diabetes aged 
18 to 64 years felt they had received enough 
support from local services to help manage their health condition.
20 Most of the people we spoke 
with were very positive about the support they 
received from their GP practice to manage their 
diabetes. Particularly important to them was the feeling they could contact someone, such as the 
specialist nurse, for advice when they needed it.
People generally reported that their 
conversations with healthcare professionals included discussions around diet and physical 
activity. One person told us, “My GP has done 
research on Asian foods and has helped educate me in healthier cooking techniques and foods 
to use, specifically for the kinds of food I eat.” 
Others told us that these conversations did not always take their cultural background into 
account.
One person we spoke with told us that his experience of diabetes care was good and that local 
services seemed to be working well together. He felt that his diabetes was well-controlled, and he 
received check-ups from a specialist nurse every six months at his GP surgery. He said that he had 
a good understanding of the tests and check-ups he received. He preferred seeing the specialist nurse rather than a GP because of her specialist knowledge and she had more time to explain 
things to him.
He told us that he had lost 12kg in weight in the last three years through making changes to 
his diet and lifestyle, which he attributed to a combination of his own determination as well as 
the input of the specialist nurse. He had not been offered a structured education programme, 
although he said he would not have attended anyway due to lack of time. He had seen a dietitian when he was first diagnosed, but had not received any dietary advice tailored to a South Asian 
diet. He said that the information, leaflets and advice he received were all about English food.
“If they could have an Asian version of foods so that when the Asian community go in, not so much 
us, because we can eat a bit of that, but there are the elderly Asian communities who may not be able to eat a roast potato or smoked salmon or this or that. I want daals and rotis and stuff like 
that. So for them to look at that leaflet and to look at all the list that you can eat from … There’s 
nothing there.”
Man with Type 2 diabetes
People with a learning disability who we interviewed in depth were often reliant on their support staff to manage their diabetes. This 
included help with tasks such as monitoring 
symptoms; buying and preparing food; and arranging visits to services or from healthcare 
professionals. One person said, “My carer is 
always getting my shopping for me, with me, make sure I get the right food.”
We found that people with a learning disability 
living in a residential social care setting had 
relatively limited self-management. They appeared often to be able to adhere to a 
controlled diet, although may have less opportunity to make their own choices. People 
were often reliant on others for decision-making about their diet, and were encouraged to take 
physical activity by support staff.
In half of the CCGs visited we were told of the 
adaptations made to provide information and education on diabetes to people with a learning 
disability. In one CCG information was provided 
in an easy read format with one to one support from health and care staff. We spoke with four 
people with a learning disability and Type 2 
diabetes from this CCG area. They felt they had access to education and the support they needed 
from GPs, community nurses and their own 

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE STRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT
19support staff. One person had been supported 
to attend appointments by their support workers 
when community nurses first assisted them 
with insulin injections to make sure they were comfortable. This support had allowed the person 
to build a rapport with community nurses.
Almost all of the CCG areas we visited had 
undertaken work to gather the opinions and care experiences of people with diabetes. A 
common theme from the feedback was the need 
for greater ongoing support and education. This included information around healthy lifestyles 
and available services, emotional support, and 
support groups with their peers.
Many people with diabetes need, or find it useful 
to, self-monitor their blood glucose levels. This 
is usually done with a finger prick blood test 
using a blood glucose meter that indicates the blood glucose level at the time of the test. For 
people with Type 1 diabetes and people with 
Type 2 diabetes using insulin, it is an effective self-management tool. The role of blood glucose 
self-monitoring for people with Type 2 who are 
not on insulin is less clear, and NICE recommends that it is not routinely offered.
18A Diabetes UK survey found that 27% of 1,000 respondents had been refused a prescription 
for blood glucose test strips or had the number 
of test strips on their prescription restricted in the past 12 months. Of these, over half (52%) 
have Type 1 diabetes.
21 People found these 
restrictions stressful and had to make difficult decisions about when to test or not.
Healthcare staff from several services described 
efforts to support specific groups within their local community. This included developing 
support groups for young people with Type 
1 diabetes, the use of health advocates and interpreters for people from BME backgrounds, 
and increased access to diabetes education 
during religious festivals which involve fasting. In the example below, lay educators were able to 
provide culturally relevant information, support 
and training to people in their local community. 
GP practices from two of the CCGs we visited had 
set up their own education sessions to support 
patients on an ongoing basis. In one of these 
areas, GPs felt the success of these were due to them being patient-led.
USE OF LAY EDUCATORS
City and Hackney CCG use lay educators to run diabetes awareness sessions in the community. They held events in schools, libraries and workplaces where they offered screening and advice on 
how to reduce the risk of developing diabetes. For those with a specific risk, the lay educators ran 
group education courses on prevention.
The lay educators delivered structured education to people with Type 2 diabetes. They were trained 
and quality assured against a national standard and peer-reviewed in their delivery of education. 
The nationally accredited education programme was delivered in the diabetes centre and in community settings, with courses being run in Turkish and English. Feedback from the education 
groups was overwhelmingly positive, and people we met who had attended these courses had 
good knowledge of self-management including diet.
Members of the lay educator team were part of a project to investigate a relatively high non-
attendance rate among a group of patients for appointments with diabetes specialist nurses and 
dietitians.
The lay educators were inducted, trained, reviewed and appraised like other staff and were 
deemed by the service to be a vital and cost-effective part of the extended diabetes team.
City and Hackney CCG

MY DIABETES, MY CARESTRUCTURED EDUCATION AND SUPPORT FOR SELF-MANAGEMENT
20PATIENT EDUCATION PROGRAMMES
GPs in this area have set up patient-led diabetes education sessions at their practices. This began 
as a patient group with talks from a clinician. Over time patients led on researching and providing 
information themselves, with information checked by a nurse for accuracy.
In two practices where we spoke with GPs about the groups, they have become patient-led and 
attendance has increased. GPs said this format provided people with a greater insight into their 
condition and was proving more effective in achieving lifestyle changes than clinician-led advice 
alone. They gave an example of one person who had never complied with statin medication until it was explained by other people at the group how important it was. At the staff focus group 
we were informed that five out of 16 practices had used similar sessions to educate people with 
diabetes. The CCG chair told us that the ‘model’ practices who employed these sessions were the best performers in the CCG in terms of diabetes outcomes and other areas such as cardiovascular 
disease. 
Slough CCG

 CARE PATHWAY
PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE
Care pathway
KEY FINDINGS
 zMost people we spoke with received the checks recommended by the National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Generally, people reported they were able to discuss their 
care with primary care staff and they felt they received good explanations about their care.
 zPeople showed a lack of awareness and understanding of their test results. Very few people 
had a hand-held care plan they could take with them as they moved between services.
Care processes 
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) outlines the care pathway for 
management of diabetes, which includes a focus 
on providing individualised care, education and lifestyle advice, and identifying and managing 
complications of diabetes through an annual 
review.
18 The annual review is an important 
opportunity to monitor a person’s health, act 
on any concerns, understand individual needs 
and plan future care. Each year, everyone with diabetes should have their blood glucose, blood 
pressure, cholesterol, eyes, feet, kidney function, 
weight, and smoking status checked. These ‘care processes’ are important to identify and act on 
potential complications.The majority of people we spoke with on our 
fieldwork were aware of the tests and checks 
they should be receiving, and told us they 
received the checks every six or 12 months. Generally, people reported they were able to 
discuss their care with primary care staff and 
felt they received good explanations. People with a learning disability had less awareness and 
understanding of the care processes and whether 
they were receiving them. However, national data shows that too many working age people do not 
receive all of the care processes, with people with 
Type 1 diabetes less likely to receive them (39%) than those with Type 2 diabetes (54%) 
[FIGURE 
1, page 22] .d
d. National Diabetes Audit does not include data on 
uptake of retinopathy screening.

MY DIABETES, MY CARECARE PATHWAY
22FIGURE 4: PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE WITH DIABETES AGED 18 TO 64 YEARS RECEIVED THE EIGHT CARE 
PROCESSES RECORDED BY THE NATIONAL DIABETES AUDIT, BY CCG
Type 1 Type 2
London London% of people receiving eight 
care processes
Missing data
Quartile 1: 17% - 38%Quartile 2: 39% - 47%Quartile 3: 48% - 56%Quartile 4: 57% - 82%
Data Source: National Diabetes Audit 2014-15 
Total number aged 18-64 registered with Type 1 diabetes: 98,907 people Total number aged 18-64 registered with Type 2 diabetes: 655,647 people
In several areas, services identified barriers in 
engaging or reaching some groups of people to 
make sure they received the checks they need. 
Groups noted as being more difficult to engage with or monitor included younger people and 
people who are homeless. In some areas with 
culturally diverse populations, engagement with services was identified as a barrier.
CCGs told us of methods to increase the number 
of people attending their checks. They included 
refining systems for inviting and reminding people of their annual reviews, and offering extended opening hours including appointments on Saturdays. Several people we interviewed told 
us they appreciated it when their practice sent 
them reminders for forthcoming appointments.
A few CCGs had developed electronic pathways 
or checklists that guided GPs and practice nurses 
through the care processes and referral on to 
other services. Elsewhere one CCG incentivised GPs to deliver and record all care checks that 
would be followed up by specialist nurses if any 
were missed.
INCREASING AWARENESS OF KEY TESTS
The retinopathy service in Sandwell and West Birmingham has developed a comic style leaflet and a YouTube video about the importance of eye screening, available in different languages.
Languages are Sign, Urdu, Somali, Romanian, Punjabi, Polish, Pashto, Hindi, Gujarati, Chinese / 
Mandarin, Arabic, Bengali / Sylheti.

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE CARE PATHWAY
23In most areas referral to other services as a result 
of checks (for example podiatry and dieticians) 
seemed to be working effectively. However, a 
few areas identified that access to these services needed improving. Some services lacked capacity 
resulting in delays; elsewhere communication 
breakdowns between services prevented adequate follow-up of patients.
It was common for staff in care homes to support 
people with diabetes to attend checks. However, 
in one CCG area we were told this could create resource issues for care homes as they would 
have to release a member of staff to accompany 
the individual.
The care homes we visited in two CCG areas were 
not recording or monitoring whether residents 
had received the necessary care processes. 
In another there was a lack of awareness or understanding among care home staff of the care 
processes. Although staff knew that maintenance 
of blood glucose levels was important, some care homes had received conflicting information 
about how frequently this should be monitored 
for people with Type 2 diabetes.
We were told of several people with a learning 
disability who were reluctant to attend some of 
their health checks, in particular, ones that are 
more intrusive such as eye screening. In one case we heard about a person who, concerned that 
his levels would be too high at his annual review 
the following day, deliberately starved himself and overworked at the gym resulting in collapse. 
These examples highlight the importance of 
knowledgeable care staff who can support people to undertake all of their checks safely.Treatment targets and test 
results
Three treatment targets – relating to glucose 
control (HbA1c), blood pressure, and cholesterol 
– should be monitored and met in all people 
with diabetes.e When these targets are achieved, 
they reduce the risk of people developing 
complications. However, in 2014 to 2015, only a 
third of people with Type 2 diabetes achieved all three, and people with Type 1 were half as likely 
to do so – only 17% met the three targets.
Services in five CCGs told us that people found 
it difficult to make the lifestyle changes needed to manage their diabetes effectively. Two people 
whose care we tracked in detail told us they knew 
their test results were not in the desired range but had not altered their lifestyle to improve their 
health. This included continuing to smoke and 
having a diet they knew to be unhealthy. This demonstrates the importance of an individual 
approach to supporting people to manage their 
diabetes, which considers the influences on individual’s behaviour and choices. The patient-
led education approach in Slough is an example 
of a supportive approach which helped people to change their behaviour. Elsewhere others told us 
how they received helpful support from their GP, 
with comments such as: “My GP explains how to make changes, takes time to talk to me” and “My 
GP and nurse helped me greatly to achieve my 
goals.”
CCGs told us that a lack of resources, lack of 
access to support and lifestyle services, and a 
lack of specialist practitioners were barriers to 
improving achievement of the treatment targets. Services in a few areas also told us that the 
existence of comorbidities, including mental 
illness, and societal factors such as deprivation and homelessness were barriers to people 
achieving treatment targets.
e. HbA1c target should be individualised. This is 
particularly important for the frail elderly, in whom tight 
glucose control may be associated with greater risk of hypoglycaemia.

MY DIABETES, MY CARECARE PATHWAY
24While people were generally aware of the checks 
they should be receiving, it was less common 
for them to be aware of and understand their 
test results, especially their foot risk scores. This raises questions about the effectiveness of the 
structured education programmes and annual 
review – a person’s ability to self-manage their diabetes will be reduced if they do not have 
a good grasp of the condition or their current 
status.In a few areas we saw that people were provided information booklets that described the care they 
should expect to receive. This seemed to increase 
awareness and understanding of their condition. In one area where people seemed to demonstrate 
better understanding of their test results, we 
were told that nurses spent time answering their questions and explaining the results in a way 
they could understand.

 PERSON-CENTRED CARE COORDINATION
PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE
Person-centred care 
coordination
KEY FINDINGS
 zKnowledge of diabetes was often lacking within some staff groups, particularly in adult 
social care, and in some areas diabetes training for care workers was absent. This can result in 
insufficient support for people who rely on others to help manage their diabetes.
[SECTION-CAREPLANNING] Care planning
Evidence shows that people who are engaged in 
their health and care are more likely to receive 
care and treatment that is appropriate to their 
needs, to adopt healthier behaviours and are less likely to use emergency care.
NHS England’s House of Care model for long term conditions puts person-centred, 
coordinated care at the centre 
[FIGURE 5] .23 The 
model was developed from the Diabetes UK Year of Care, as a framework that enables continuity 
of care, with care organised around the person and their individual goals, rather than expecting 
them to fit into the system.
Our report Better care in my hands describes how 
well people are involved in their own care and 
what good involvement looks like.25 In this report 
we found that people with a long-term condition were less likely to feel involved in their care than 
others.FIGURE 5: NHS ENGLAND’S HOUSE OF CARE MODEL
Organisational
& clinical processes
CommissioningEngaged,
informed
individuals
& carersPlan
ActDo
StudyHealth & care
professionals
committed to
partnership
workingPerson-centred
coordinated
care

MY DIABETES, MY CAREPERSON-CENTRED CARE COORDINATION
26Generally, people we spoke with told us they felt 
involved in decisions relating to their diabetes 
care. This included decisions around medication, 
insulin treatment, diet, and type of blood glucose monitor. However, some people wanted 
more control over their prescriptions, including 
avoiding the inconvenience of multiple trips for repeat prescriptions. 
People from the majority of areas we visited 
told us they felt supported by healthcare staff 
in planning their care. People who described the support they had received highlighted the 
importance of staff providing clear explanations 
when their treatment changed and spending enough time during appointments to give them 
confidence in understanding and managing their 
condition. Some people with Type 1 diabetes told us they would like print outs of test results 
and copies of letters sent between services such 
as GPs and hospitals. One person who was sent copies of letters relating to their care told us how 
much they appreciated it, “This is brilliant for me. 
I am really interested in the results and it helps me to keep track.”
People described their positive experiences 
of being supported using phrases such as 
“consistency”, “continuity”, being “listened to” and “kept informed”. However, we were told of 
a few instances where people felt their GP did 
not respond to their needs or they felt judged by healthcare staff, leading them to disengage with 
the service.In order for care to be person-centred, people 
should be fully involved in their care planning. 
This is also important in people’s ability to self-
manage their condition. However, we found that most people did not have written care plans they 
could take with them when they moved between 
services. Only 9% of people who responded to the GP Patient Survey (July 2016) aged 18 to 64 
years with diabetes said they had a written care 
plan. In the 2015 Diabetes UK care survey, 64% of respondents said they were not involved in 
care planning.
People told us that their carers or family were 
involved when they wanted them to be. Some people described how it was helpful to involve 
family who could then help with changes to diet. 
People with a learning disability told us how their family or support worker assisted them with 
appointments. However, a few of those with 
a learning disability told us they experienced a lack of sensitivity during consultations or 
at their GP practice reception. This included 
staff talking to the person’s mother rather than them or not listening to what they had to 
say. One person told us about being confused 
during appointments, and needing the support of a friend afterwards. In contrast, another 
person told us that their GP was particularly 
good because he explained things “slowly and politely”. In the example below, the person found 
their GP particularly helpful but identified a lack 
of support more widely for people with a learning disability.
WORKING EFFECTIVELY ACROSS SERVICES
In South Reading CCG, a specialist community team including a consultant and diabetes specialist nurses, worked with complex patients and practices in the management of complex diabetes.
The specialist team held a virtual clinic with the practice to discuss patients who were not well 
managed and advise the GP on the best course of action. When patients had blood tests, results were included in their care plan and sent to the patient before their review meeting. This meant 
that at the review they were aware of their results and could focus discussions on areas for 
improvement.
When the diabetes specialist team were involved directly with patients, they worked collaboratively 
with the GP practice to discuss care planning with the patient and primary care staff so that the 
same advice and information was given to everyone.
South Reading CCG

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE PERSON-CENTRED CARE COORDINATION
27We spoke with a woman with a learning disability living in Salford. She had been diagnosed with 
Type 2 diabetes 12 years previously. After her diagnosis she was referred by the adult learning 
disability team to a dietitian who supported her to change her diet.
“So she went ‘change your diet’ and I did, I went on diet coke, it was a bit funny at first when you 
taste diet coke to normal coke but I’ve got used to it now, my diet has changed completely now.”
She has six-monthly checks with her GP or the practice nurse, and felt that she had good control 
of her diabetes, although she needed to reduce her sugar levels. She said she had a good 
understanding of how to manage her diabetes. She told us that she liked her GP, who was a specialist in treating people with a learning disability, and described the good care she received.
“People understanding me, that they know I have a learning disability, being patient, because [my 
GP] is really patient with you, she listens to you, so she doesn’t jump in, she gives you time to talk 
and stuff.”
She had tried a number of slimming and exercise approaches but felt they did not meet her needs 
because they were complicated and confusing, or aimed at an older age group.
“[The GP] recommended this guy, he was useless, I told him about my disability and what I wanted 
and he said ‘great,’ he said, ‘there’s a diabetes keep-fit class.’ I said ‘forget keep fit’. I have a 
disability where I can’t do keep fit because I can’t copy the person if they’re facing me, they have 
to stand beside me then I can copy them.”
Although she had been offered a structured education programme, she did not want to go 
because she felt she already understood some of the content, such as how to take medication. She 
also told us there was a need for more information and support around diet and exercise for people 
with a learning disability, and that she would value a support group for people with a learning disability who have diabetes.
“Where I live there’s no clubs or support groups for people with learning disabilities to go and 
exercise.”
Woman with Type 2 diabetes

MY DIABETES, MY CAREPERSON-CENTRED CARE COORDINATION
28Person-centred care for people we spoke 
with was about ease of making contact with 
healthcare professionals for advice; being seen 
by perceived specialists (in particular specialist nurses); being listened to; having some control 
over aspects of their treatment; and being 
considered as a whole person (not just as someone with diabetes). It was felt to be absent 
if consultations lacked compassion or appeared 
to be only ‘tick-box’ exercises.
“I am a whole person, not just a foot, 
eye or blood sugar level. Clinicians need to think what is best for the whole person”
Woman with Type 2 diabetes
Diabetes specialist nurses and diabetes specialist 
dietitians in City and Hackney CCG had behaviour 
change training and used the principles of active 
care planning from the Year of Care model to deliver coordinated care and promote self-
management in those with diabetes. All people 
we spoke with in this area had care plans and an awareness of their contents.
Experience of coordination
People reported a mixed experience of care coordination between organisations. They felt 
staff were well coordinated within general 
practice, such as diabetes specialist nurses working well with GPs. However, some told 
us they did not feel their care was as well 
coordinated between GP and hospital services. Some people told us they had to repeat their 
information and noted that their test results were 
often not shared after a hospital appointment to the GPs or vice versa. They frequently mentioned 
having to repeat information to specialist 
services.
In most of the CCGs we visited, some people 
told us they had received conflicting information 
relating to their diabetes care. In a few instances 
this related to conflicting dietary advice; others said advice about how to manage their diabetes 
conflicted with advice they had received on how 
to manage their other conditions.People felt their care was well coordinated when 
they saw the same health professionals at each 
visit. Some people felt that changes in staff could lead to a lack of consistency in their care. In 
some areas, care for people who have a learning 
disability and diabetes was not well coordinated. Elsewhere we saw examples of support staff 
working well alongside healthcare professionals 
to coordinate care. One person we interviewed had a team of professionals, including her GP, 
learning disability nurse, social worker and 
support worker, visit her home to assess her current condition and review her care plan, 
including diabetes.
“Nursing staff provide support and 
I discuss my diabetes with them in terms of blood sugars, diet and control. I’ve not been referred to a dietician but the cooks are aware of my condition, I am able to make drinks or snacks anytime if I feel unwell. I see the podiatrist every six to eight weeks. I see the GP for annual reviews independently and feel confident and knowledgeable about my condition. The only time I need a carer to accompany me is for retinopathy checks, both to help manoeuvre the wheelchair through narrow parts and once I’ve had the drops put in I find it more difficult to see.”
Man with Type 2 diabetes
Services commonly told us that developing and 
maintaining good working relationships with 
other services was key to improving coordination. 
Efforts from CCGs focused on education and specialist support for primary and community 
healthcare professionals. Approaches to 
encourage information-sharing across services included multidisciplinary team meetings; 
diabetes networks; and making it possible 

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE PERSON-CENTRED CARE COORDINATION
29for primary and secondary care staff to view 
electronic records.
Information sharing across services is essential for 
coordinated care. Most CCGs were positive about 
information sharing where services were using the same IT system. However in four CCG areas 
staff reported difficulties accessing information. 
This made it difficult to get a clear and full picture of a person’s care needs and could cause issues like delays if, for example, there were changes to medication. In another area staff 
reported that there were sometimes difficulties 
accessing electronic information because they did not have the necessary ‘permissions’.
Through community diabetes models, specialists 
interact with primary care in supportive ways to 
assist with the care of people with diabetes who may not need to be seen in a hospital clinic.
INTEGRATION OF SERVICES
Liverpool’s new approach to diabetes care is focused on six community-based clinics that promote good self-management, integrated delivery and education. The clinics provide specialist support to 
people to help them manage their diabetes.
Clinicians from each partner organisation work together to deliver care, with the most specialist 
care continuing to be delivered in hospital. People with diabetes see consultants, nurses, dietitians 
and podiatrists closer to home in community-based clinics.
People are given resource packs, agree a care plan tailored to their own individual health and 
care needs, and are offered the opportunity to attend diabetes education sessions. The service also aims to increase the knowledge base and skill level of primary and community care health 
professionals who diagnose and treat people with diabetes.
Liverpool Diabetes Partnership (LDP) nurses determine how best to support GP practices and their 
patients – for example attending diabetes clinics at the practice or spending time with nurses and 
GPs to discuss patients with complex needs. The introduction of food workers and health trainers 
enables care to be provided to people based on their needs, such as shopping and cooking support for people with a learning disability.
The LDP holds monthly multidisciplinary meetings to discuss people with particularly complex 
needs, enabling all relevant professionals to have input into the person’s care. Staff told us this 
was an effective way to share information about people’s care and treatment and that working between organisations had improved. All people we spoke with as part of the review felt care for 
people with diabetes had improved as a result of the LDP .
Liverpool Diabetes Partnership

MY DIABETES, MY CAREPERSON-CENTRED CARE COORDINATION
30While many people we spoke with were positive 
about the support they received from their GP 
practice, not all were confident that their primary 
care staff had sufficient diabetes knowledge and expertise to be able to support them. Two 
people told us their GPs did not understand 
the treatment and prescribing that was being led by hospital doctors. One of these people 
told us that the lack of understanding at their 
practice meant that he did not receive all of the recommended checks. Another person told us 
that their GP “was not knowledgeable enough 
about treatment options.”
We heard of a range of learning activities 
available for primary care staff to increase 
their knowledge of diabetes and its treatment, 
including courses, seminars and workshops. Across several CCGs diabetes specialist nurses 
were seen as key in supporting and developing 
the knowledge and understanding of other healthcare professionals. In one area specialist 
nurses offer training days every six months to 
NHS staff and primary care staff, while in another the specialist nurse designed a competency framework for practice nurses. Staff in one area 
told us they feel comfortable approaching the 
specialist nurses at any time for support.
In one CCG we heard how diabetes specialist 
nurses would support care home staff to increase 
their awareness and understanding of diabetes. 
In another area support workers told us they felt confident in their knowledge to support people 
and had training from their employers and from 
the local acute trust. However, in a few CCG areas there was little or no training available. A lack of 
awareness and understanding of diabetes among 
adult social care staff may mean those they care for who are at risk of diabetes or already living 
with undiagnosed diabetes are not identified. 
It can also result in a lack of care for those who have been diagnosed; they may not be 
supported to self-manage effectively or to attend 
necessary checks meaning complications may not be identified.

 CONCLUSIONS
PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE
Conclusions
The scale of the diabetes challenge in England 
is enormous. There are 3.5 million people with 
diabetes and diabetes care accounts for 10% 
of the NHS budget – both of which are rising. Through better supporting people to manage their diabetes, we have an opportunity to delay 
or avoid a huge amount of complications and 
over a number of years save the NHS billions of pounds.
CQC supports the strengthened focus on 
improving diabetes prevention and care as a 
result of the NHS Five Year Forward View. This 
includes the introduction of the NHS Diabetes 
Prevention Programme that will support people who have been identified as at high risk of 
developing Type 2 diabetes to become healthier.
In addition to a strong public health focus on 
tackling obesity, and preventing or delaying those at high risk from developing diabetes, we 
need to ensure that everyone who has diabetes 
receives the care and support they need.
We have found that most people experience 
good community diabetes care overall. However 
care is not always flexible and responsive enough 
to meet people’s individual needs. A stronger focus on personalised care is needed, along with 
the recognition that people need emotional 
support at the time of diagnosis and on an ongoing basis. Rather than expecting people to 
fit in with current arrangements, services need the flexibility to provide care that fits around 
people’s lives and responds to their priorities.
With the input of specialists when required, 
health and care services based in the community 
play a key role in providing people with care 
and support. It is also vital to emphasise the importance of self-care for long-term conditions, 
and to make sure people are equipped with 
the necessary support and knowledge about their condition. Our review found the extent to 
which people are supported to successfully self-
manage their diabetes is limited. When the NHS 
does not support and empower people to self-
manage their long-term condition, it impacts on patient experience and on NHS resources. Better 
community care leads to better outcomes for 
people and better use of public money. All parts of the health and care system need to make self-
care a real priority, for the benefit of patients and 
the future of the NHS.
As the number of people with diabetes increases, 
the challenge for health and care professionals to 
deliver coordinated care for everyone becomes 
greater. The current model of care provision will become unsustainable as the prevalence of 
Type 2 diabetes continues to rise. Responding 
to these challenges is at the core of improving care quality; improving health and managing 
resources more effectively. 

MY DIABETES, MY CARECONCLUSIONS
32Community diabetes care can be improved 
through building on what is good and learning 
from what is already working well, in particular 
where commissioners and services are using innovative approaches including technology to 
engage with and support their communities.
CQC encourages health and social care 
commissioners, providers and professionals to work together to deliver an approach to 
diabetes care that puts people at the centre of 
their own care and enables them to improve their health and wellbeing and manage their diabetes 
effectively.
Key components of this approach are:
 zA local plan for improved diabetes care 
through support to self-management.
 zCommissioners and providers engaging with their whole community to increase 
awareness and understanding of diabetes 
and encourage uptake of health checks.
 zProfessionals engaging with people to understand their individual needs and 
developing a personalised care plan 
together.
 zEmotional support embedded in care for people with diabetes.
 zDevelopment of education approaches to ensure everyone, including people from BME 
groups and people with a learning disability, 
can gain the knowledge and skills they need.
 zEvaluation of the effectiveness of structured education and annual review in giving people 
the knowledge and ability to self-manage 
their diabetes.
 zMaking better use of available technology to support self-management through education, 
motivation, and self-monitoring.
 zTraining in diabetes for care workers to 
enable them to fully support and care for 
people with diabetes.CQC is committed to encouraging improvement in diabetes care. CQC will:
 zReview our approach to long-term 
conditions, including diabetes, as part of 
the development of the next phase of our 
inspections of primary medical services and community health services.
 zSupport our inspection teams to develop their understanding of good and outstanding 
diabetes care.
 zIdentify and share examples of outstanding 
diabetes care from our inspections.
 zInclude data relating to diabetes care in the development of our new insight model 
for monitoring quality and encouraging 
improvement.
 zUse our inspections to encourage providers of adult social care to ensure their staff have 
necessary capacity and capability.

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
33Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Liverpool and Sandwell & West Birmingham Clinical Commissioning Groups, 
who agreed to be pilot sites for this review and the following Clinical Commissioning Group areas that 
we visited in the review:
 zCity and Hackney
 zEast Lancashire
 zLewisham
 zNorth East Lincolnshire zRushcliffe
 zSlough
 zSouth Reading
 zSouth Worcestershire
We are grateful for their support particularly in putting us in touch with people and staff, and use of 
facilities to enable us to hold focus groups.
Thank you to providers of care for enabling staff to speak with us and for helping to organise the 
logistics of the fieldwork.
We would also like to thank the members of our external advisory group for their support and advice 
during the review:
Organisations in the external advisory group
 zAssociation of British Consultant Diabetologists
 zDepartment of Health
 zDiabetes and You
 zDiabetes UK
 zJoint British Diabetes Societies for Inpatient Care zNational Diabetes Audit
 zNHS England
 zRace Equality Foundation
 zSandwell & West Birmingham NHS Trust
 zSouth Asian Health Foundation
 zThe Whittington Hospital NHS Trust
We would also like to thank the people who were willing to share their experiences with us during the review.

MY DIABETES, MY CAREREFERENCES
34References
1  Association of Public Health 
Observatories Diabetes Prevalence Model
2   Hex N and others, Estimating the current 
and future costs of Type 1 and Type 
2 diabetes in the United Kingdom, including direct health costs and indirect 
societal and productivity costs, 2012
3  National Audit Office, The management of 
adult diabetes services in the NHS, 2012
4  National Audit Office, The management of adult diabetes services in the NHS: 
progress review, 2015
5  Baxter M and others, Estimating the 
impact of better management of 
glycaemic control in adults with Type 1 
and Type 2 diabetes on the number of clinical complications and the associated 
financial benefit, 2016 
6  Care Quality Commission, Diabetes care 
pathways thematic data review, 2014 
7  Health and Social Care Information Centre (Now NHS Digital), National Diabetes 
Audit 2014–2015 Report 1: Care 
Processes and Treatment Targets, 2016 
8  Diabetes UK, Facts and Stats, 2015
9  NHS Diabetes, Commissioning for people with learning disabilities who have Diabetes, 2011
10  Public Health England, NHS Health Check: 
our approach to evidence, 2013
11  NHS Health Check national data, 2013-
2018 5 year cumulative, 2016
12  Diabetes in BME communities working group, Diabetes in BME communities: 
raising awareness, improving outcomes 
and sharing best practice, 2014
13  NHS England, Public Health England and Diabetes UK, NHS Diabetes Prevention 
Programme14  NHS Diabetes and Diabetes UK working 
group, Emotional and Psychological 
Support and Care in Diabetes, 2010
15  National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE), CG91 Depression in adults with a chronic physical health 
problem: recognition and management, 
16  Public Health England, Adult obesity and type 2 diabetes, 2014
17  Diabetes UK, Care Survey Results, 2015
18  NICE, NG28 Type 2 diabetes in adults: management, 2015
19  NICE, NG17 Type 1 diabetes in adults: diagnosis and management, 2015
20  NHS England, GP Patient Survey, 2016
21  Diabetes UK, Test Strip and Meters 
Survey, 2016
22  Hibbard JH & Greene J, What the evidence 
shows about patient activation: better health outcomes and care experiences; 
fewer data on costs, 2013
23  NHS England, NHS Outcomes Framework, 
Domain 2: Enhancing quality of life for people with long-term conditions: House 
of Care
24  Year of Care Partnerships, Year of Care Thanks for the Petunias – A Guide to 
Developing and Commissioning Non-Traditional Community Services to 
Support Self-Management of People 
with Long Term Conditions, 2011
25  Care Quality Commission, Better care in my hands: A review of how people are 
involved in their care, 2016 

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE APPENDIX: HOW WE CARRIED OUT THE REVIEW
35Appendix: How we 
carried out the review 
We worked with an expert advisory group who 
provided advice and guidance throughout the 
review and with a range of health and social care 
providers and commissioners who helped us to understand diabetes care in their areas.
We developed our approach with the help of two 
Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs Liverpool 
and Sandwell & West Birmingham) areas during the pilot stage. We used findings from the 
pilot to refine the assessment framework and 
fieldwork.
We selected CCG areas for the review based 
on their context (geographical region and 
demographic characteristics) and performance across a range of available quantitative measures 
we identified as giving insight in to the quality of 
community diabetes care in an area.
We carried out the fieldwork for the review 
between January and March 2016 in the 
following areas:
 zCity and Hackney (London)
 zEast Lancashire (North)
 zLewisham (London)
 zLiverpool (North)
 zNorth East Lincolnshire (North)
 zRushcliffe (Midlands and East)
 zSandwell & West Birmingham (Midlands and 
East)
 zSlough (South)
 zSouth Reading (South)
 zSouth Worcestershire (Midlands and East)What we did 
Existing evidence and data
We reviewed existing evidence from our comprehensive inspections, information provided 
by Healthwatch and CCGs, and a range of data 
sources including the National Diabetes Audit, Quality Outcome Framework and GP Patient 
Survey.
Online feedback form
We used an online webform, limited to the 
areas covered by the field work, to gather the 
experiences, opinions, and insights of people 
about their diabetes care. Between mid-November 2015 and early 2016 we gathered 96 
responses from individuals who told us about 
the support and education they are given, how in control of their diabetes they feel and how 
coordinated their care is across different services.
Fieldwork by our inspection teams
We held interviews with GPs, lead clinicians and 
commissioners; multi-professional/multi-agency 
focus groups with staff; focus groups and one 
to one interviews with people with diabetes. We also case-tracked people with diabetes.

MY DIABETES, MY CAREAPPENDIX: HOW WE CARRIED OUT THE REVIEW
36Engagement work with people from 
specific Black and minority ethnic (BME) groups and people with a learning disability
Qualicis Research was commissioned to explore 
the perceptions and experiences of community 
diabetes care among individuals from BME 
groups and also people with a learning disability. Semi-structured in depth interviews were used 
to capture the lived experiences of individuals 
with diabetes. 20 people from BME backgrounds (specifically, African, African-Caribbean and 
South Asian) and 22 people with a mild learning 
disability (with approximately two thirds living independently and the others in residential care).Review framework
Our review and report were structured around four key questions:
1. Identification and diagnosis 
Do services ensure that all those at high risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes are identified?
Do people receive their diabetes diagnosis in a 
clear and effective way?
2. Structured education and support for 
self-management 
Are people newly diagnosed with diabetes referred to a structured education programme 
offering health and wellbeing advice to enable 
them to better manage their condition?
3. Care pathway 
Are people with diabetes receiving the care 
processes recommended by the National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)?
Is the risk of developing complications associated 
with diabetes reduced or minimised?
4. Person-centred care coordination 
Is care planned, co-ordinated, and delivered 
effectively to ensure that the person is at the centre of their care?
Do people have good experiences of moving 
between services and providers?

PEOPLE’S EXPERIENCES OF COMMUNITY DIABETES CARE  
37© Care Quality Commission 2016
Published September 2016This document may be reproduced in whole or in part in any format or medium for 
non-commercial purposes, provided that it is reproduced accurately and not used in 
a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. The source should be acknowledged, 
by showing the document title and © Care Quality Commission 2016.

How to contact us 
Call us on  03000 616161 
Email us at  enquiries@cqc.org.uk 
Look at our website  www.cqc.org.uk 
Write to us at  
Care Quality Commission  
Citygate  
Gallowgate  
Newcastle upon Tyne 
NE1 4PA 
 Follow us on Twitter   
@CareQualityComm 
Please contact us if you would like a summary 
of this report in another language or format. 
 
CQC-345-092016