[SECTION-DELEGATION] Delegating medicines
administration
Page last updated: 27 June 2023
Categories:Organisations we regulate
A care worker supporting people with their medicines must be
appropriately trained and competent to carry out this task.
Some medicines cannot be routinely administered by a care worker. For example injections
(such as insulin) or medicines administered via a feeding tube are clinical or nursing tasks. A
registered nurse (RN) can delegate the administration of these medicines to a care worker.
The RN must be confident that the care worker is competent to take on this task. Delegation
must always be in the best interest of the person. Providers should also consider how to obtain
consent.
Principles and responsibility
The Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) code says registrants must be accountable for their
decisions to delegate tasks and duties to other people. It says they must:
only delegate tasks and duties that are within the other person's competence
make sure that everyone they delegate tasks to is adequately supervised and supported7/26/25, 2:11 PM [SECTION-DELEGATION] Delegating medicines administration - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/delegating-medicines-administration 1/3

Staff will need extra and more specific training and competency checks before undertaking
these tasks. Read more about regular training and competency expectations.
The RN delegating the task must have full confidence that the care worker is competent to carry
out the delegated task.
The care worker must:
This should also include out of hours arrangements.
The care worker should know what to do if the person refuses their medicines. The care
worker’s responsibilities should be covered:
When a care worker accepts the delegated task, they are responsible for administering the
medicines:
Periodically the RN should make sure the care worker remains competent to carry out the
delegated task.
The RN must make sure that everyone they delegate tasks to is adequately supervised and
supported so they can provide safe and compassionate careconfirm that the outcome of any task they have delegated to someone else meets the
required standard
understand their limitations
know when and how to seek help and escalate concerns
make sure they are comfortable in carrying out the task safely and correctly
as part of their specific training to the delegated task
in the provider’s policy
in line with the prescribed instructions and
as part of a specific and detailed care plan7/26/25, 2:11 PM [SECTION-DELEGATION] Delegating medicines administration - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/delegating-medicines-administration 2/3

© Care Quality Commission 2025Both the RN and care worker should understand accountability, liability and responsibility. They
should make a record of their understanding.
The Royal College of Nursing has published some guidance on the principles of delegation. Find
out more
This page is for:
Find out more
Medicines: information for adult social care services
For further advice, contact medicines.enquiries@cqc.org.uk
See also
Royal College of Nursing: Information on accountability and delegation for all members of the
nursing team
GOV.UK: administration of medicine in care homes
Skills for Care: Delegated healthcare activities frameworkadult social care services7/26/25, 2:11 PM [SECTION-DELEGATION] Delegating medicines administration - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/delegating-medicines-administration 3/3