Diabetes - type 1:
When should I suspect diabetic ketoacidosis
in a person with type 1 diabetes?
Last revised in December 2024
Suspect diabetic ketoacidosis (/topics/diabetes-type-1/background-
information/complications/) (DKA) in a person with known diabetes or significant
hyperglycaemia (finger-prick blood glucose level greater than 11 mmol/L) and the
following clinical features:
Increased thirst and urinary frequency.
Weight loss.
Inability to tolerate fluids.
Persistent vomiting and/or diarrhoea.
Abdominal pain.
Visual disturbance.
Lethargy and/or confusion.
Fruity smell of acetone on the breath.
Acidotic breathing — deep sighing (Kussmaul) respiration.
Dehydration, which can be classified as: 
Mild — only just clinically detectable. 
Moderate — dry skin and mucus membranes, and reduced skin turgor. 
Severe — sunken eyes and prolonged capillary refill time. 
Shock (resulting from severe dehydration). The person is severely ill with:
Tachycardia, poor peripheral perfusion, and (as a late sign) hypotension
(indicating decreased cardiac output).
Lethargy, drowsiness, or decreased level of consciousness (indicating decreased
cerebral perfusion).
Reduced urine output (indicating decreased renal perfusion).
If DKA is suspected:
Assess for precipitating factors of DKA, such as:
Infection (for example pneumonia or a urinary tract infection). 
Physiological stress (such as trauma or surgery).
Non-adherence to insulin treatment regimen or intentional insulin omission in order
to lose weight (diabulimia (/topics/diabetes-type-1/background-
information/complications/)).
Other medical conditions (such as hypothyroidism or pancreatitis). 
Drug treatment (such as corticosteroids, diuretics, and sympathomimetic drugs
[for example salbutamol]).
Test for ketones (produced by the liver when there is a lack of glucose [starvation
ketones] and as an alternative energy source when there is a relative insulin
deficiency).
In an adult with suspected DKA, test for urine or blood ketones even if plasma
glucose levels are near normal. 
In a child or young person with suspected DKA, test for blood ketones. If this is not
possible, arrange immediate admission to a hospital with acute paediatric

The content on the NICE Clinical Knowledge Summaries site (CKS) is the copyright ofClarity Informatics Limited (trading
as Agilio Software Primary Care) (https://agiliosoftware.com/primary-care/). By using CKS, you agree to the licence set
out in theCKS End User Licence Agreement (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-conditions/cks-end-user-licence-
agreement).facilities. 
Ketones are high if above 2+ in the urine or above 3 mmol/L in the blood.
Consider the possibility of DKA in all people with type 1 diabetes who are unwell,
bearing in mind that:
Hyperglycaemia may not always be present — children and young people on insulin
therapy may develop DKA with normal blood glucose levels.
Low blood ketone levels (less than 3 mmol/L) do not always exclude DKA.
Basis for recommendation
Show
©NICE (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence)2025. All rights reserved. Subject toNotice of rights
(https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-conditions#notice-of-rights).