Handling sharps in adult social
care
Page last updated: 16 May 2025
Categories:Organisations we regulate
Sharps injuries are a well-known risk in the health and social
care sector.
Sharps contaminated with an infected patient's blood can spread over 20 diseases, including
hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV (human immunodeficiency virus).
Medical sharps include any device used for a healthcare activity to puncture or lacerate the skin,
including:
Broken glass items, such as ampoules or vials, also pose a risk and should be disposed of safely
Legislationneedles and anything attached to them, such as syringes
scalpels and scissors
lancets.7/26/25, 2:12 PM Handling sharps in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/handling-sharps-adult-social-care 1/5

Guidance from the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) says an employer will need to act to
manage the risks if workers:
Employers are legally required to assess risks from sharps injuries and put appropriate control
measures in place.
Health and Safety (Sharp Instruments in Healthcare) Regulations 2013 apply to organisations
providing healthcare. This includes:
See  .
Considerations for providers
Avoid the unnecessary use of sharps
Only use sharps when needed.
Needle-free equipment is available for certain procedures. You should use it where it is
reasonably practicable to do so. 
Use safer sharps
Syringes and needles are available with a shield or cover. This slides or pivots to cover the
needle after use to prevent or minimise the risk of accidental injury.use sharps to provide care or other services to people
provide care or other services to people who are likely to use sharps
are involved in handling such equipment after use, for example in sterile services and
waste disposal
are likely to accidentally come across used sharps, for example during laundering.
nursing homes
providers delivering healthcare in residential homes or people’s own homes.
Guidance on the Health and Safety (Sharp Instruments in Healthcare) Regulations 20137/26/25, 2:12 PM Handling sharps in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/handling-sharps-adult-social-care 2/5

Always work with prescribers and healthcare providers to use safer sharps where possible.
Prevent the recapping of needles
You must not recap needles after use unless the employer’s risk assessment has identified that
it is required to prevent a risk.
In these limited cases, provide appropriate devices to control the risk of injury to employees. For
example, you can use needle-blocks to remove and hold the needle cap and allow safe one-
handed recapping.
Safe disposal
Residential homes and care provided in people’s own homes
External healthcare professionals may use sharps as part of their routine practice. They should
safely dispose of sharps using their own sharps disposal process.
Care workers may use sharps as part of a delegated task. There should be a safe sharps
disposal process for staff to follow. This may include disposal through a waste contractor.
Make sure staff are aware how to use sharps. Assess the risk to the person receiving care and to
care staff and take appropriate precautions to protect against sharps injury.
Self-administration
People may administer their own medicines and generate sharps waste. For example, people
may administer their own insulin or take their own blood glucose readings.
People should dispose of sharps in a dedicated sharps waste bin. This can be prescribed or
supplied by the local authority. They should arrange with the local authority to collect these as
needed.
When you assess the risk of medicines self-administration include the use, safe storage and
disposal of sharps.
Nursing homes7/26/25, 2:12 PM Handling sharps in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/handling-sharps-adult-social-care 3/5

When nurses use sharps in a nursing home, they should dispose of sharps in a dedicated sharps
waste bin provided by the clinical waste contractor.
Sharps injury
You should adequately assess the risks from sharps injuries and put appropriate control
measures in place.
Train your staff so they know how to work safely and without risk to health with the specific
sharps equipment that they or others might use.
Staff should know what action to take if there is a sharps injury or incident.
If staff are injured by sharps at work, they must notify their employer as soon as practicable. The
employer must have sufficiently robust arrangements to allow staff to notify them in a timely
way. This includes where the employee works out of normal office hours.
If an employee has been injured by a sharp that has or may have exposed them to a blood-
borne virus, as the employer, you must:
You must record sharps injuries when notified. You should:make sure the employee has:
immediate access to medical advice
been offered post-exposure prophylaxis and any other medical treatment, as
advised by a doctor
consider whether the employee should receive counselling.
investigate the circumstances and causes of the incident
take any action needed.7/26/25, 2:12 PM Handling sharps in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/handling-sharps-adult-social-care 4/5

© Care Quality Commission 2025This page is for:
Find out more
Medicines: information for adult social care services
For further advice, contact medicines.enquiries@cqc.org.uk
See also
Sharps injuries (Health and Safety Executive)
Health and Safety (Sharp Instruments in Healthcare) Regulations 2013
NICE Guidance SC1: Managing medicines in care homes
NICE Guidance NG67: Managing medicines for adults receiving social care in the community
Code of Practice on the prevention and control of infections and related guidanceadult social care services7/26/25, 2:12 PM Handling sharps in adult social care - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/handling-sharps-adult-social-care 5/5