Storing medicines in fridges in
care homes
Page last updated: 3 November 2022
Categories:Organisations we regulate
A range of medicines need to be refrigerated.
These include insulins, antibiotic liquids, injections, eye drops and some creams. These
medicines must be stored between 2ºC and 8ºC.
This guidance describes how you must manage medicines which need to be in the 'cold chain'.
To find out if a product needs to be stored in the fridge, check the packaging. You can also refer
to the Patient Information Leaflet (PIL) or visit the electronic Medicines Compendium (eMC)
Medicines fridges
Dedicated medicines fridges should be of a suitable standard to keep medicines at the correct
temperature.
Some fridges are advertised as ‘medicines fridges’. But they may maintain temperatures
in ranges that are too low or too high.7/26/25, 2:11 PM Storing medicines in fridges in care homes - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/storing-medicines-fridges-care-homes 1/3

Recording temperaturemake sure your fridge can maintain the correct temperatures for the medicines being
stored
make sure your medicines fridges are secure and accessible only to authorised staff
do not store food or biological samples in your medicines fridge
to avoid accidentally interrupting the electricity supply, use a switchless socket. Or, clearly
label the plug with a cautionary notice, for example: “Do not unplug/switch off”
do not store large amounts of medicines. This can lead to inadequate air-flow and
potential freezing
regularly check the dates of the contents of your fridge. Rotate stock according to your
setting's policy
regularly clean and defrost the fridge and keep dated records of this.
record the temperature of the fridge daily
you should record minimum, maximum and current temperatures, using a
minimum/maximum thermometer.
the thermometer should be reset after each reading
make sure that your staff understand how to read and reset the thermometer and why
this is necessary
take care that the thermometer probe cable does not interfere with the door seal. This
could cause the temperature to fall outside the recommended temperature range
make sure that your staff know what to do when the fridge is outside the recommended
temperature range
keep records of any actions taken. This includes seeking advice on whether the medicines
are still safe to use.7/26/25, 2:11 PM Storing medicines in fridges in care homes - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/storing-medicines-fridges-care-homes 2/3

© Care Quality Commission 2025Some small services do not regularly keep medicines that need refrigeration. In exceptional
circumstances, such services could consider using a separate locked container in the food
fridge. Only trained and competent staff should have access. Staff should keep records of
temperature monitoring. This is a proportionate approach to making sure medicines are safe to
use and should be fully risk assessed.
This page is for:
Find out more
Medicines: information for adult social care services
For further advice, contact medicines.enquiries@cqc.org.uk
See also
electronic Medicines Compendium (eMC)adult social care services7/26/25, 2:11 PM Storing medicines in fridges in care homes - Care Quality Commission
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/storing-medicines-fridges-care-homes 3/3