[CHAPTER-1] 5 Endocrinology
Contents
The essence of endocrinology 203
Endocrine physiology 204
Diabetes mellitus ( DM):
Classiﬁ  cation and diagnosis 206
Treating diabetes mellitus 208
Complications of established 
diabetes 210
Diabetic neuropathy  and  diabetic 
foot care 212
Hypoglycaemia 214
Insulinoma 215
Thyroid and parathyroid disease:
Thyroid function tests ( TFT S) 216
Thyrotoxicosis 218
Hypothyroidism (myxoedema) 220
Parathyroid hormone and 
hyperparathyroidism  222
Hypoparathyroidism 222
The adrenal gland:
Adrenal cortex and Cushing’s 
syndrome 224
Addison’s disease (adrenal insuf-
ﬁ ciency) 226
Hyperaldosteronism 228
Phaeochromocytoma 228
Hirsutism, virilism, gynaecomastia, 
and impotence 230
The pituitary gland:
Hypopituitarism 232
Pituitary tumours 234
Hyperprolactinaemia 236
Acromegaly 238
Diabetes insipidus ( DI) 240Fig 5.1 Our understanding of hormones, while 
still evolving, originated from a mix of random ex-
periments, coincidental ﬁ  ndings, and extraordinary 
sounding characters! One of these was the ‘castrati’ 
that featured in opera throughout the 16th, 17th, and 
18th centuries. These were boys who were castrated 
before puberty. The voice of a castrato was pure and 
forceful, due to their enormous lung capacity and 
resulting breath control. They also experienced no 
temporal recession, and their arms and legs were 
long. One of the most well renowned was Farinelli, 
the stage name of Carlo Maria Michelangelo Nicola 
Broschi. It was said he had a well-modulated soprano 
voice with extraordinary breath control. His picture 
hangs in Handel’s house in London. The practice was 
stopped in the early 20th century when it was ac-
knowledged how inhumane the operation was.
We thank Dr Stephen Gilbey, our Specialist Reader for this chapter.
_OHCM_10e.indb   202_OHCM_10e.indb   202 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyFor scientists
  •Deﬁ ne a syndrome, and match it to a gland malfunction.
  •Measure the gland’s output in the peripheral blood. Deﬁ  ne clinical syndromes 
associated with too much or too little secretion ( hyper - and hypo -syndromes, 
respectively; eu- means normal, neither  nor , as in euthyroid ). Note factors that 
may make measurement variable, eg diurnal release of cortisol.
  •If suspecting hormone deﬁ  ciency, test by stimulating the gland that produces it 
(eg short ACTH stimulation test or Synacthen ® test in Addison’s). If the gland is 
not functioning normally, there will be a blunted response to stimulation.
  •If suspecting hormone excess, test by inhibiting the gland that produces it (eg 
dexamethasone suppression test in Cushing’s). If there is a hormone-secreting 
tumour then this will fail to suppress via normal feedback mechanisms.
  •Find a way to image the gland. NB: non-functioning tumours or ‘incidentalomas’ 
may be found in health, see p 224. Imaging alone does not make the diagnosis.
  •Aim to halt disease progression; diet and exercise can stop progression of im-
paired fasting glucose to frank diabetes. 1, 2 For other glands, halting progression 
will depend on understanding autoimmunity, and the interaction of genes and 
environment. In thyroid autoimmunity (an archetypal autoimmune disease), it 
is possible to track interactions between genes and environment (eg smoking 
and stress) via expression of immuno logically active molecules ( HLA class I and 
II, adhesion molecules, cytokines, CD40, and complement regulatory proteins). 3
Endocrinologists love this reductionist approach, but have been less successful 
at understanding emergent phenomena —those properties and performances of 
ours that cannot be predicted from full knowledge of our perturbed parts.  We 
understand the diurnal nature of cortisol secretion, for example, but the science 
of relating this to dreams, the consolidation of memory, and the psychopathology 
of families and other groups (such as the endocrinology ward round you may be 
about to join) is in its infancy.  But as doctors we are steeped in the hormonal lives 
of patients (as they are in ours) —and we may as well start by recognizing this now.
For those doing exams
‘What’s wrong with him?’ your examiner asks, boldly. While you apologize to 
the patient for this rudeness by asking, ‘Is it alright if we speak about you as if 
you weren’t here?’, think to yourself that if you were a betting man or woman 
you would wager that the diagnosis will be endocrinological. In no other disci-
pline are gestalt impressions so characteristic. To get good at recognizing these 
conditions, spend time in endocrinology outpatients and looking at collections 
of clinical photographs. Also, speciﬁ  c cutaneous signs are important, as follows.
Thyrotoxicosis:  Hair loss; pretibial myxoedema (confusing term, p 218); onycho-
lysis (nail separation from the nailbed); bulging eyes (exophthalmos/proptosis).
Hypothyroidism:  Hair loss; eyebrow loss; cold, pale skin; characteristic face. You 
might, perhaps should, f ail your exam if you blurt out ‘Toad-like face’.
Cushing’s syndrome:  Central obesity and wasted limbs ( =‘lemon 
on sticks’ see ﬁ g 5.2); moon face; buff  alo hump; supraclavicular fat 
pads; striae.
Addison’s disease:  Hyperpigmentation (face, neck, palmar creases).
Acromegaly:  Acral (distal) + soft tissue overgrowth; big jaws (macro-
gnathia), hands and feet; the skin is thick; facial features are coarse.
Hyperandrogenism ( ): Hirsutism; temporal balding; acne.
Hypopituitarism:  Pale or yellow tinged thinned skin, resulting in 
ﬁ ne wrinkling around the eyes and mouth, making the patient look 
older.
Hypoparathyroidism:  Dry, scaly, puff  y skin; brittle nails; coarse hair.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism:  Short stature, short neck, and short 
4th and 5th metacarpals.
The essence of endocrinology
Fig 5.2 ‘Lemon 
on sticks.’
_OHCM_10e.indb   203_OHCM_10e.indb   203 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logy
Fig 5.4 Neuroregulation and integration of endocrine axes makes us who we are —and who we are 
and what we do feeds back into our hormonal milieu. Multifactorial dis ruptions within the growth 
hormone ( GH), luteinizing hormone ( LH)–testosterone, adreno cortico tropin ( ACTH)–cortisol and insu-
lin axes play a major role in healthy maturation and ageing.Endocrine physiology
Hormones are chemical messengers which act directly on nearby cells (paracrine 
eff ect), on the cell of origin (autocrine eff  ect), at a distant site (endocrine eff  ect), or 
as neurotransmitters (brain and gastrointestinal tract). Thirst, thermal regulation, 
appetite, sleep cycles, menstrual cycle, and stress/mood are all controlled by the 
hypothalamus. Releasing factors produced by the hypothalamus reach the pituitary 
via the portal system (pituitary stalk), see ﬁ g 5.3. The releasing factors stimulate or 
inhibit the production of hormones from the anterior pituitary,  ﬁ g 5.4. Vasopressin 
and oxytocin are produced in the hypothalamus and stored and released from the 
posterior pituitary.
Fig 5.3 Hypothalamic-pituitary axis.Posterior pituitary
Oxytocin
Ovaries and 
testes
Many 
tissuesBreasts/
gonadsAdrenalsGH TSH ACTH
Thyroid
Renal 
tubulesBreasts/
uterusProlactin
Testosterone/
oestrogensThyroxine
LactationSteroidsAnterior pituitary
Vasopressin
LH/FSHHypothalamus
Releasing factors
_OHCM_10e.indb   204_OHCM_10e.indb   204 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
_OHCM_10e.indb   205_OHCM_10e.indb   205 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyDiabetes mellitus ( DM): classiﬁ  cation and diagnosis
DM results from lack, or reduced eff  ectiveness, of endogenous insulin. Hyperglycae-
mia is one aspect of a far-reaching metabolic derangement, which causes serious 
microvascular (retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy) or macrovascular problems: stroke, 
MI, renovascular disease, limb ischaemia. So think of DM as a vascular dis-
ease:1 adopt a holistic approach and consider other cardiovascular risk factors too.
Categories of diabetes and dyslipidaemia
T
ype 1 DM: Usually adolescent onset but may occur at any age. Cause: insulin de-
ﬁ ciency from autoimmune destruction of insulin-secreting pancreatic  cells. Pa-
tients must have insulin, and are prone to ketoacidosis and weight loss. Associated 
with other autoimmune diseases ( >90% HLA DR3  ± DR4). Concordance is only ~ 30% in 
identical twins, indic ating environmental inﬂ  uence. Four genes are important: one 
(6q) determines islet sensitivity to damage (eg from viruses or cross-reactivity from 
cows’ milk-induced antibodies). Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults ( LADA) is a 
form of type 1 DM, with slower progression to insulin dependence in later life.
Type 2 DM: (Formerly non-insulin-dependent DM, NIDDM ) is at ‘epidemic’ levels in many 
places, mainly due to changes in lifestyle, but also because of better diagnosis and improved long evity.
4 Higher prevalence in Asians, men, and the elderly (up to 18%).   
Most are over 40yrs, but teenagers are now getting type 2 DM (OHCS p156). Cause: 
insulin secretion ± insulin resistance. It is associated with obesity, lack of exercise, 
calorie and alcohol excess.  80% concordance in identical twins, indicating stronger 
genetic inﬂ  uence than in type 1 DM. Typically progresses from a preliminary phase of 
impaired glucose tolerance ( IGT) or impaired fasting glucose ( IFG). (This is a unique 
windo
w for lifestyle intervention.) Maturity   onset diabetes of the young ( MODY ) is a 
rare autosomal dominant form of type 2 DM aff  ecting young people.
Impaired glucose tolerance ( IGT): Fasting plasma glucose <7mmol/L and OGTT (oral 
glucose tolerance) 2h glucose ≥ 7.8mmol/L but <11.1mmol/L.
Impaired fasting glucose ( IFG): Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 6.1mmol/L but <7mmol/L 
(WHO criteria). Do an OGTT to exclude DM. The cut-off   point is somewhat arbitrary.
IGT and IFG denote diff  erent abnormalities of glucose regulation (post-prandial and 
fasting). There may be lower risk of progression to DM in IFG than IGT. Manage both 
with lifestyle advice (p 93) + annual review. Incidence of DM if IFG and Hb A1C at high 
end of normal ( 37–46mmol/mol) is ~ 25%.5
Other causes of DM Steroids; anti- HIV drugs; newer antipsychotics.   
  •Pancreatic: pancr eatitis; surgery (where >90% pancreas is removed); trauma; 
pancreatic destruction (haemochromatosis, cystic ﬁ  brosis); pancreatic cancer.
  •Cushing’s disease; acromegaly; phaeochromocytoma; hyperthyroidism; pregnancy.
  •Others: congenital lipody strophy; glycogen storage diseases.
Metabolic syndrome (syndrome x) Deﬁ  nition from International Diabetes Federa-
tion: central obesity ( BMI >30, or  waist circ, ethnic-speciﬁ  c values), plus two of BP ≥130/85, 
triglycerides ≥1.7mmol/L, HDL ≤ 1.03/1.29mmol/L, fasting glucose ≥ 5.6mmol/L or  
type 2 DM. ~20% are aff  ected; weight, genetics, and insulin resistance important in aetiol-
ogy. Vascular events —but probably not beyond the combined eff  ect of individual risk 
factors. : Exercise;  w eight; treat individual components.
1 Chicken or egg? Most type 2 diabetes-associated genes have a function in the vasculature, and str ess in 
-cells can result from vascular defects in the pancreas, so maybe vascular events trigger DM.6
_OHCM_10e.indb   206_OHCM_10e.indb   206 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology  •Symptoms of hyperglycaemia (eg polyuria, polydipsia, unexplained weight loss, 
visual blurring, genital thrush, lethar
gy) AND raised venous glucose detected 
once —fasting ≥7mmol/L or random ≥11.1mmol/L OR
  •Raised venous glucose on two separate occasions —fasting ≥7mmol/L, random 
≥11.1mmol/L or oral glucose tolerance test ( OGTT)—2h value ≥ 11.1mmol/L
  •HbA1c ≥48mmol/mol. Avoid in pregnancy, children, type 1 DM, and haemoglobi-
nopathies.
Whenever you have a needle in a vein, do a blood glucose (unless recently done); 
no
te if fasting or not. Non-systematic, but better than urine tests (false Ωves).Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus: WHO criteria (rather arbitrary!)
Occasionally it may be diffi   cult to diff  erentiate whether a patient has type 1 or 2 
DM, although they can present diff  erently (see table 5.1). Features of type 1 include 
weight loss; persistent hyper glycaemia despite diet and medications; presence of autoantibodies: islet cell antibodies (
ICA) and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 
(GAD) antibodies; ketonuria.
Table 5.1 Diff erences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes
Type 1 DM Type 2 DM
Epidemiology Often starts before puberty Older patients (usually)
Genetics HLA D3  and D4 linked No HLA association
Cause Autoimmune -cell destruction Insulin r esistance/ -cell dysfunction
Presentation Polydipsia, polyuria,  w eight, ketosis Asymptoma tic/complications, eg MI
Not all new-onset DM in older people is type 2: if ketotic ±  a poor response to oral hy-
poglycaemics (and patient is slim or has a family or personal history of autoimmunity), think of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (
LADA) and measure islet cell antibodies.Diff erentiating type 1 and 2 diabetes
Dietary carbohydrate is a big determinant of postprandial glucose levels, and low-carbohydrate diets improve glycaemic control. How do low-carbohydrate, ke-togenic diets (
<20g of carbohydrate daily; LCKD) compare with low-glycaemic in-
dex, reduced-calorie diet (eg 500kcal/day deﬁ  cit from weight maintenance diet)? 
In one randomized study over 24 weeks, LCKD had greater improvements in Hb A1c 
(Ω15 vs Ω 5mmol/L), weight (Ω 11kg vs Ω 7kg), and HDL. Diabetes drugs were reduced 
or eliminated in 95% of LCKD vs 62% of LGID participants. 6 NB: eff  ects on renal func-
tion and mortality are unknown so these diets remain controversial.
Monitoring glucose control
      Fingerprick glucose if on insulin (type 1/2). NB: before  a meal informs about 
long-acting insulin doses; after  meals inform about the dose of short-acting 
insulin.
2       Glycated haemoglobin (Hb A1c) relates to mean glucose level over previous 
8wks ( RBC t½). Targets are negotiable, eg 48–57mmol/mol (depends on pa-
tient’s wish and arterial risk, eg past MI or stroke). If at risk from the eff  ects of 
hypoglycaemia, eg elderly patients prone to falls, consider less tight control. Tight control may not alter all-cause mortality.
7 Complications rise with rising 
HbA1c, so any improvement helps.
3       Be sure to ask about hypoglycaemic attacks (and whether symptomatic). 
Hypogly
caemic awareness may diminish if control is too tight, or with time 
in type 1 DM, due to glucagon secretion. It may return if control is loosened.What is the best diet for obese patients with type 2 diabetes?
_OHCM_10e.indb   207_OHCM_10e.indb   207 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyTreating diabetes mellitus
General Focus on education and lifestyle advice (eg ex ercise to insulin sensitiv-
ity), healthy eating: p 244—saturated fats, sugar, starch-carbohydrate, moder ate 
prot ein. Foods made just for diabetics are not needed. One could regard bariatric 
surgery as a cure for DM in selected patients. Be prepared to negotiate Hb A1c target 
and review every 3–6 months. Assess global vascular risk; start a high-intensity sta-
tin (p 115), eg atorvastatin as tolerated, control BP (p211). Give foot-care (p 212). (Pre-)
pregnancy care should be in a multidisciplinary clinic ( OHCS p23). Advise informing 
DVLA and not to drive if hypoglycaemic spells (p 159; loss of hypo glycaemia awareness 
may lead to loss of licence; permanent if HGV).
Type 1 DM Insulin (see BOX ‘Using insulin’ ).
Type 2 DM See ﬁ g 5.5.
Metformin:  A biguanide.   insulin sensitivity and helps weight. SE: nausea; diarrhoea 
(try modiﬁ  ed-release version); abdominal pain; not hypoglycaemia. Avoid if e GFR 
36mL/min (due to risk lactic acidosis).
DPP4 inhibitors/gliptins: (Eg sitagliptin.) Block the action of DPP-4 , an enzyme which 
destroys the hormone incretin.
Glitazone:  insulin sensitivit y; SE: hypo glycaemia, fractures, ﬂ  uid retention, LFT (do 
LFT every 8wks for 1yr, stop if ALT up >3-fold). CI: past or present CCF; osteoporosis; 
monitor weight, and stop if   or oedema.
Sulfonylurea:   insulin secr etion; eg gliclazide  40mg/d . SE: hypoglycaemia (moni-
tor glucose); it  weight.
SGLTI : Selective sodium –glucose co-transporter- 2 inhibitor. Blocks the reabsorp-
tion of glucose in the kidneys and promotes excretion of excess glucose in the urine (eg empagliﬂ  ozin, shown to reduce mortality from cardiovascular disease in patients with type 
2 DM, when compared to placebo). 8Oral hypoglycaemic agentsFig 5.5 Management of type 2 diabetes. Aim for Hb A1C 48mmol/mol or 53 if two or more agents.
Data from Algorithm for blood glucose lowering therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes,
http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng 28/chapter/ 1-Recommendations#drug-treatment- 2Triple therapy not tolerated:
metformin, SU and GLP 1 mimetic 
(see BOX ‘GLP analogues’).If Hb A1C rises to 58mmol/mol, triple therapy with:
1       Metformin, DPP4 inhibitor, + SU
2       Metformin, pioglitazone, + SU
3       Metformin, SU/pioglitazone, + SGLT-2 i
4       Insulin-based therapy
Insulin: see BOX ‘Using insulin’. Use 
a structured programme. Review the need for existing oral treatments.If Hb A1C rises to 58mmol/mol, consider dual therapy with:
1       Metformin + DPP4 inhibitor (eg sitagliptin)
2       Metformin and pioglitazone
3       Metformin and sulphonylurea ( SU)
4       Metformin and SGLT-2 i (glifazon)Monotherapy
1st-line standard release metforminLifestyle modiﬁ  cation
Diet, weight control, exercise
_OHCM_10e.indb   208_OHCM_10e.indb   208 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyVital  t o educate to self-adjust doses in the light of exercise, ﬁ  ngerprick glucose, 
calorie intake, and carbohydrate counting. •Phone support (trained nurse 7/24). 
•Can modify diet wisely and avoid binge drinking (danger of delayed hypoglycae-
mia). •Partner can abort hypoglycaemia: sugary drinks; GlucoGel® PO if coma (no 
risk of aspiration). •Dose titration to target —eg by 2–4 UNIT steps.
It is vital to write UNITS in full when prescribing insulin to avoid misinterpre-
tation o
f U for zero!
Subcutaneous insulins Short-, medium-, or long-acting. Strength: 100U/mL.
1       Ultra-fast acting (Humalog®; Novorapid®); inject at start of meal, or just after 
(unless sugar
-laden) —helps match what is actually eaten (vs what is planned).  
2       Isophane insulin (variable peak at 4–12h): favoured by NICE (it’s cheap!).
3       Pre-mixed insulins (eg NovoMix® 30 = 30% short-acting and 70% long-acting).
4       Long-acting recombinant human insulin analogues (insulin glargine) are used 
at bedtime in t
ype 1 or 2 DM. There is no awkward peak, so good if nocturnal 
hypoglycaemia is an issue. Caution if considering pregnancy. Insulin detemir  
is similar and has a r
ole in intensive insulin regimens for overweight type 2 DM.
Common insulin regimens Plan the regimen to suit the lifestyle, not vice 
ve
rsa. Disposable pens: dial dose; insert needle 90° to skin. Vary injection site (outer 
thigh/abdomen); change needle daily.
  •‘BD biphasic regimen’: twice daily premixed insulins by pen (eg NovoMix 30®)—
useful in type 2 DM or type 1 with regular lifestyle.
  •‘QDS regimen’: before meals ultra-fast insulin + bedtime long-acting analogue: 
useful in type 1 DM for achieving a ﬂ  exible lifestyle (eg for adjusting doses with 
size of meals, or exercise).
  •Once-daily before-bed long-acting insulin: a good initial insulin regimen when 
s
witching from tablets in type 2 DM. Typical dose to work up to (slowly!): ≥ 1U/24h 
for every unit of BMI in adults. Consider retaining metformin ( ±pio glitazone) if 
needed for tight control and patient is unable to use BD regimen.
Dose adjustment for normal eating ( DAFNE ): Multidisciplinary teams promoting 
aut
onomy can save lives. DAFNE  found that training in ﬂ  exible, intensive insulin 
dosing improved glycaemic control as well as well-being. 9 It is resource intensive.
Subcutaneous insulin dosing during intercurrent illnesses (eg inﬂ  uenza)
 Advise patients to avoid stopping insulin during acute illness.
  •Illness often increases insulin requirements despite reduced food intake.
  •Maintain calorie intake, eg using milk.
  •Check blood glucose ≥ 4 times a day and look for ketonuria. Increase insulin 
doses if glucose rising. Advise to get help from a specialist diabetes nurse or GP 
if concerned (esp. if glucose levels are rising or ketonuria). One option is 2-hourly 
ultra fast-acting insulin (eg 6–8U) preceded by a ﬁ  ngerprick glucose check.
  •Admit if vomiting, dehydrated, ketotic ( p832), a child, or pregnant.
Insulin pumps (continous subcutaneous insulin) Consider when attempts to 
r
each Hb A1C with multiple daily injections have resulted in disabling hypoglycaemia 
or person has been unable to achieve target Hb A1C despite careful management.Using insulin
Work as incretin mimetics.  Incretins are gut peptides that work by aug ment ing  
insulin release. Given by subcutaneous injection. Patients must have BMI >35 and 
speciﬁ  c psychological or other medical problems associated with obesity, or have 
a BMI lower than 35 kg/m2, and for whom insulin therapy would have signiﬁ  cant 
occupational implications, or weight loss would beneﬁ  t other signiﬁ  cant obesity-
related comorbidities. To continue a GLP 1 mimetic, a person should have a bene-
ﬁ cial metabolic response (a reduction of Hb A1C by at least 11mmol/mol) and a 
weight loss of at least 3% of initial body weight in 6 months.Glucagon-like peptide ( GLP) analogues (exenatide, liraglutide)
_OHCM_10e.indb   209_OHCM_10e.indb   209 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyComplications of established diabetes
Prospective studies show that good control of hyperglycaemia is key to prevent ing 
microvascular complications in type 1 and 2 DM.10 Find out what problems are be-
ing e
xperienced (eg glycaemic control, morale, erectile dysfunction —p230).
Assess vascular risk BP control (see BOX ‘Controlling blood pressure in diabetes’ ) is 
crucial for preventing macro vascular disease and mortality. Refer to smoking ces-
sation services. Check plasma lipids.
Look for complications •Check injection sites for infection or lipohypertrophy 
(f
atty change): advise on rotating sites of injection if present.
  •V ascular disease:  Chief cause of death. MI is 4-fold commoner in DM and is more 
likely to be ‘silent’. Stroke is twice as common. Women are at high risk —DM re-
moves the vascular advantage conferred by the female sex. Address other risk 
factors —diet, smoking, hypertension (p 93). Suggest a statin (eg atorvastatin 20mg 
nocte) for all, even if no overt IHD, vascular disease, or micro albuminuria. Aspirin 
75mg reduces vascular events (in context of secondary prevention). Safe to use in 
diabetic retinopathy. 11
  •Nephropathy: (p314.) Microalbuminuria is when urine dipstick is Ωve for protein 
but the urine albumin:creatinine ratio ( UA:CR ) is  3mg/mmol (units vary, check lab) 
reﬂ ecting early renal disease and  vascular risk. If UA:CR  >3, inhibiting the renin –
angiotensin system with an ACE-i or sartan, even if BP is normal, protects the kidneys. 
Spironolactone may also help. 12 Refer if UA:CR  >7 ± GFR falling by >5mL/min/ 1.73m2/yr.13
  •Diabetic retinopathy: Blindness is pr eventable. Annual retinal screening man-
dat
ory for all patients. Refer to an ophthalmologist if pre-proliferative changes 
or if any uncertainty at or near the macula (the only place capable of 6/6 vision). 
Pre-symptomatic screening enables laser photocoagulation to be used, aimed to 
st
op production of angiogenic factors from the ischaemic retina. Indications: macu-
lopathy or proliferative retinopathy. See ﬁ gs 5.6–5.9.
  •Background retinopathy: Microaneurysms (dots), haemorrhages (blots), and 
har
d exud ates (lipid deposits). Refer if near the macula, eg for intravitreal tri-
amcinolone.  
  •Pre-proliferative retinopathy: Cotton-wool spots (eg infarcts), haemorrhag-
es, v
enous beading. These are signs of retinal ischaemia. Refer to a specialist.
  •Proliferative retinopathy: New vessels form. Needs urgent referral.
  •Maculopathy: (Hard to see in early stages.) Suspect if acuit y. Prompt 
laser, intra vitreal steroids, or anti-angiogenic agents may be needed in macular oedema.
  Pathogenesis: Capillary endothelial change  v ascular 
leak  microaneurysms   capillary occlusion   local hypoxia + ischae-
mia  new vessel formation. High retinal blood ﬂ  ow caused by hypergly-
caemia (and  BP and pregnancy) triggers this, causing capillary pericyte 
damage. Microvascular occlusion causes cotton-wool spots  (± blot haemor-
rhages at interfaces with perfused retina). New vessels form on the disc 
or ischaemic areas, proliferate, bleed, ﬁ  brose, and can detach the retina. 
Aspirin2 (2mg/kg/d) may be recommended by ophthalmologists; there is no 
evidence that it  bleeding.
  •Cat aracts: May be juvenile ‘snowﬂ  ake’ form, or ‘senile’ —which occur earlier in 
diabetic subjects. Osmotic changes in the lens induced in acute hyperglycaemia reverse with normoglycaemia (so wait before buying glasses).
  •Rubeosis iridis: New vessels on iris: occurs late and may lead to glaucoma.
  •Me
tabolic complications: p832.
  •Diabe tic feet: p 212.
  •Neur opathy: p 212.
2 As DM has so many vascular events, particularly encourage statin use (p 690), esp. if LDL >3mmol/L or systolic 
BP >140. Even consider a statin whatever the pre-treatment cholesterol; discuss with your patient .
_OHCM_10e.indb   210_OHCM_10e.indb   210 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
Fig 5.9 Scars from previous laser photocoagu-
lation.
Courtesy of Prof J Trobe.
Fig 5.6 Background retinopathy, with micro-
aneurysms and hard exudates.
Courtesy of Prof J Trobe.Fig 5.7 Pre-proliferative retinopathy, with 
haemorrhages and a cotton-wool spot.
Reproduced from Warrell et al, Oxford Textbook 
of Medicine , 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.
Fig 5.8 Proliferative retinopathy, with new 
vessel formation and haemorrhages.
Courtesy of Prof J Trobe.Type 1 DM: Treat BP if >135/85mmHg, unless albuminuria or two or more features 
of metabolic syndrome, in which case it should be 130/80mmHg ( NICE 2015). Use an 
ACE-i 1st line or angiotension receptor antagonist if intolerant. If hypertensive and 
underlying renal involvement, see local guidance, p 304.
Type 2 DM: Target BP <140/80mmHg or <130/80mmHg if kidney, eye, or cerebrovas-
cular damage. 1st-line drug treatment should be an ACE-i, except in those of Afri-
can or Caribbean origin, where ACE-i plus diuretic or a calcium-channel antagonist 
(CCA) should be started. For pregnant women off  er CCA. Do not off  er aspirin for the 
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease to adults with type 1 DM (NICE 2015). 
Don’t combine an ACE-i with an angiotension receptor antagonist.Controlling blood pressure in diabetes
‘I cannot eat what I want because of your pitiful diet. Sex is out because diabetes 
has made me impotent. Smoking is banned, so what’s left? I’d shoot myself if 
only I could see straight.’ Start by acknowledging your patient’s distress. Don’t 
shrug it off  —but don’t take it at face value either. Life may be transformed by 
cataract surgery, sildenaﬁ  l (unless contraindicated, p 230), dietary negotiation, and 
sport (it needn’t be shooting). Take steps to simplify care. Stop blood glucose 
self-monitoring if it’s achieving nothing (known to  quality of life). Even if all these 
interventions fail, you have one trump card up your sleeve: ‘Let’s both try to ﬁ  nd 
one new thing of value before we next meet —and compare notes’. This opens the 
way to vicarious pleasure: a whole new world.Improving quality of life: going beyond the pleasures of the ﬂ  esh
_OHCM_10e.indb   211_OHCM_10e.indb   211 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyDiabetic neuropathy and diabetic foot care
Refer early t o foot services (podiatry, imaging, vascular surgery).
Amputations are common ( 135/week) —and preventable: good care saves legs. 
Examine feet regularly. Distinguish between ischaemia (critical toes ± absent foot 
pulses and worse outcome) and peripheral neuropathy (injury or infection over pres-
sure points, eg the metatarsal heads). In practice, many have both.
Neuropathy Sensation in ‘st ocking’ distribution: test sensation with a 10g mono-
ﬁ lament ﬁ  bre (sensory loss is patchy so examine all areas), absent ankle jerks, neuro-
pathic deformity (Charcot joint, ﬁ g 5.11): pes cavus, claw toes, loss of transverse arch, 
rocker-bottom sole. Caused by loss of pain sensation, leading to mech anical stress 
and repeated joint injury. Swelling, instability, and deformity. Early recognition is 
vital (cellulitis or ost
eomyelitis are often misdiagnosed).
Ischaemia If the foot pulses cannot be felt, do Doppler pressure measurements. 
An
y evidence of neuropathy or vascular disease raises risk of foot ulceration. 
Educate (daily foot inspection —eg with a mirror for the sole; comfortable shoes). 
Regular chiropody to remove callus, as haemorrhage and tissue necrosis may oc-cur below, leading to ulceration. Treat fungal infections  (p
408). Surgery (including 
endovascular angioplasty balloons, stents, and subintimal recanalization) has a role.
Foot ulceration Typically painless, punched-out ulcer (ﬁ  g 5.10) in an area of thick 
callus ± superadded infection. Causes cellulitis, abscess ± osteomyelitis.
Assess degree of:
1 Neuropathy (clinically).
2 Ischaemia (clinically + Doppler ±  angiography).
3 Bony deformity, eg Charcot joint (clinically + X-ray). See ﬁ  g 5.11.
4 Infection (swabs, blood culture, X-ray for osteomyelitis, probe ulcer to reveal depth).
Management: Regular chiropody. Bed rest ± ther apeutic shoes. For Charcot joints: 
bed rest/crutches/total contact cast until oedema and local warmth reduce and bony repair is complete (
8wks). Bisphosphonates may help. Charcot joints are also 
seen in tabes dorsalis, spina biﬁ  da, syringomyelia, and leprosy. Metatarsal head sur-
gery may be needed. If there is cellulitis, admit for IV antibiotics. Common organ-
isms: staphs, streps, anaerobes. Start empirically (as per your local guidance) with benzylpenicillin 
1.2g/6h IV and ﬂ  ucloxacillin 1g/6h IV ± metronidazole 500mg/8h IV. 
IV insulin may improve healing. Get surgical help early. The degree of peripheral vas-
cular disease, general health, and patient request will determine degree of vascular reconstruction/surgery.
 Absolut
e indications for surgery:  Abscess or deep infection; spreading anaerobic 
inf
ection; gangrene/rest pain; suppurative arthritis.
Diabetic neuropathies Symmetric sensory polyneuropathy:  (‘ glove & stocking’ 
numbness, tingling, and pain, eg worse at night). : paracetamol  tricyclic (ami-
triptyline 10–25mg nocte; gradually  to 150mg)  duloxetine, gabapentin, or prega-
balin  opiates. Avoiding weight-bearing  helps.   Mononeuritis multiplex: (eg III & VI 
cranial nerves). Treatment: hard! If sudden or sev ere, immunosuppression may help 
(corticosteroids, IV immunoglobulin, ciclosporin). Amyotrophy: Painful wasting of 
quadriceps and other pelvifemoral muscles. Use electrophysiology to show, eg lum-
bosacral radiculopathy, plexopathy, or proximal crural neuropathy.  Natural course: 
variable with gradual but often incomplete improvement. IV immunoglobulins have 
been used. Autonomic neuropathy: (p505) Postural BP drop; cerebro vascular au-
toregulation; loss of respiratory sinus arrhythmia (vagal neuropathy); gastroparesis; urine retention; erectile dysfunction; gustatory sweating; diarrhoea (may respond to codeine phosphate). Gastroparesis (early satiety, post-prandial bloating, nausea/vomiting) is diagnosed by gastric scintigraphy with a 
99tech netium-labelled meal; 
anti-emetics, erythromycin, or gastric pacing. Postural hypotens ion may respond to 
ﬂ udrocortisone ( SE: oedema,  BP)/midodrine (-agonist; SE: BP).
_OHCM_10e.indb   212_OHCM_10e.indb   212 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyTraditionally prevention involves foot care advice in diabetic clinics (eg ‘Don’t go 
bare-foot’), promoting euglycaemia and normotension. But despite this, the sight 
of a diabetic patient minus one limb is not rare, and must prompt us to redouble 
our commitment to primary prevention, ie stopping those at risk from ever getting 
diabetes. The sequelae of diabetic neuropathy can lead to gangrene, amputation, 
and the impact on quality of life can be profound. As one patient post amputation 
said, ‘I begin again to walk, on crutches. What nuisance, what fatigue, what sad-
ness, when I think about all my ancient travels, and how active I was just 5 months 
ago! Where are the runnings across mountains, the walks, the deserts, the rivers, 
and the seas? And now, the life of a legless cripple. For I begin to understand that 
crutches, wooden and articulated legs, are a pack of jokes…Goodbye to family, 
goodbye to future! My life is gone, I’m no more than an immobile trunk’ (Arthur 
Rimbaud. Letter to his sister Isabelle, 10 July 1891).Preventing loss of limbs: primary or secondary prevention?
Fig 5.11 Charcot (neuropathic) joint.
Reproduced from Warrell et al, Oxford 
Textbook of Medicine , 2010, with per-
mission from Oxford University Press.
Fig 5.10 Gangrene (toes 2, 4, and 5).
Reproduced from Warrell et al, Oxford 
Textbook of Medicine , 2010, with per-
mission from Oxford University Press.
Pregnancy:  (OHCS p23) 4% are complicated by DM: either pre-existing ( <0.5%), or 
new-onset gestational diabetes ( GDM) (>3.5%).
  •All forms carry an increased risk to mother and fetus: miscarriage, pre-term 
labour, pr e-eclampsia, congenital malformations, macrosomia, and a worsening 
of diabetic complications, eg retinopathy, nephropathy.
  •Risk of GDM  if: aged over 25; family history; +ve; weight; non-Caucasian; HIV+ve; 
previous gestational DM.
  •Pre-conception: off  er general advice, and discuss risks. Control/reduce weight, 
aim for good glucose control, off  er folic acid 5mg/d until 12 weeks.
  •Screen for GDM with OGTT if risk factors at booking ( 16–18 weeks if previous GDM).
  •Oral hypoglycaemics other than metformin should be discontinued. Metformin 
may be used as an adjunct or alternative to insulin in type 2 DM or GDM.
6wks postpartum, do a fasting glucose. Even if Ωve, 50% go on to develop DM.
Surgery:  Optimal blood sugar control pre, peri, and post operatively is important 
to minimize risk of infection and balance catabolic response to surgery. Type 1 
diabetics should ideally be ﬁ  rst on the list and BMS should have been stabilized 1–2 
days pre major surgery. Consult local policy for how to manage insulin-treated/
non-insulin-treated patients on morning of surgery (eg setting up glucose/insulin 
infusion).
Acute illness:  Diabetics are prone to hyperglycaemia during periods of illness, 
in spit e of reduced oral intake. Avoid stopping insulin in periods of acute illness.Special situations in diabetes
_OHCM_10e.indb   213_OHCM_10e.indb   213 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyHypoglycaemia
 Hypoglycaemia Commonest endocrine emergency —see p 834. Prompt diagnosis 
and treatment essential —brain damage & death can occur if severe or prolonged. 
Deﬁ nition Plasma glucose  3mmol/L. Threshold for symptoms varies. See BOX. 
Symptoms Autonomic: Sweating, anxiety, hunger, tremor, palpitations, dizziness. 
Neuroglycopenic: Confusion, drowsiness, visual trouble, seizures, coma. Rarely fo-
cal s
ymptoms, eg transient hemiplegia. Mutism, personality change, restlessness, 
and incoherence may lead to misdiagnosis of alcohol intoxication or even psychosis.  
Fasting hypoglycaemia Causes: The chief cause is insulin or sulfonylurea treatment 
in a diabetic, eg  activit
y, missed meal, accidental or non-accidental overdose (check 
for ciculating oral hypoglycaemics). In non-diabetics you must EXPLAIN mechanism:
Exogenous drugs, eg insulin, oral hypoglycaemics (p 208)? access through diabetic 
in the family? Body-builders may misuse insulin to help stamina.  Also: alcohol, eg a 
binge with no food; aspirin poisoning; ACE-i; -blockers; pentamidine; quinine sulfate; 
aminoglutethamide; insulin-like growth factor. 14
Pituitary insuffi   ciency .
Liver failure, plus some rare inherited enzyme defects.
Addison’s disease.
Islet cell tumours (insulinoma) and immune hypoglycaemia (eg anti-insulin
r
eceptor antibodies in Hodgkin’s disease).
Non-pancreatic neoplasms, eg ﬁ  brosarcomas and haem angiopericytomas.
When to investigate:
  • Whipple answered this (W hipple’s triad): symptoms or signs of hypoglycemia + 
plasma glucose + resolution of symptoms or signs post glucose rise.
  •Document BM during attack and lab glucose if in hospital (monitors often not reli-
able at low readings).
  •Take a drug history and exclude liver failure.
  •72h fasting may be needed (monitor closely). Bloods: glucose, insulin, C-peptide, 
and plasma ketones if symptoma tic. If endogenous hyperinsulinism suspected, do 
insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin,  -hydroxybutyrate.
Interpreting results:
  •Hypoglycaemic hyperinsulinaemia ( HH): Causes: insulinoma, sulfonylureas, insulin 
injection (no detectable C-peptide —only released with endogenous insulin); non-
insulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycaemia syndrome, mutation in the insulin-re-
ceptor gene. Congenital HH follows mutations in genes involved in insulin secretion 
(ABCC8 , KCNJ11 , GLUD1 , CGK, HADH , SLC16A1 , HNF4A,  ABCC8 , & KCNJ11) .15
  •Insulin low or undetectable, no excess ketones. Causes: non-pancr eatic neoplasm; 
anti-insulin receptor antibodies.
  •Insulin, k etones. Causes: alcohol, pituitary insuffi   ciency, Addison’s disease.
Post-prandial hypoglycaemia May occur after gastric/bariatric surgery (‘dump-
ing
’, p623), and in type 2 DM. Investigation: Prolonged OGTT (5h, p206).
Treatment See p 834. If episodes are often, advise many small high-starch meals. 
If post-prandial glucose, give slowly absorbed carbohydrate (high ﬁ  bre). In diabet-
ics, rationalize insulin therapy (p 209).
The brain stops working if plasma glucose levels get too low, so we are nervous of levels 
3mmol/L. But some are asymptomatic at this level. So what is deﬁ  nitely 
abnormal? The answer may be 4mmol/L, allowing for inaccuracies in ﬁ  ngerprick 
BMS (NB: whole blood glucose is 10–15% < plasma glucose.)  Think: ‘In this ill patient 
when can I be sure that a low glucose is not cont ributing to their illness?’ 
If <4mmol/L, you may be wise to treat (p 834)—just in case. Consider, is the pa-
tient on hypoglycaemics, have they binged on alcohol 24hrs pre test? Skipped 
meals? Is there an underlying illness, eg insulinoma? Unlikely, but possible. Keep an open mind; let the 
GP know. Counsel patient and relative about warning signs 
of hypoglycaemia. Be more inclined to investigate if the eff  ects of even mild hypo-
glycaemia might be disastrous (eg in pilots) or if there are unexplained symptoms.The deﬁ  nition of hypoglycaemia is context-dependent
_OHCM_10e.indb   214_OHCM_10e.indb   214 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
A 50-year-old had episodic early-morning sweats and tremors and was found 
to have hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia ( = Nesidioblastosis). Selective intra-
arterial calcium infusions ( IACS) showed a 2-fold increase in insulin secretion after 
infusion of the splenic and superior mesenteric arteries,  so setting the stage for 
‘hunt the insulinoma’.
But cross-sectional imaging and endoscopic ultrasound were normal. At lapa-
rotomy, no lesion was found despite mobilization of the pancreas, or during intra-
operative ultrasound. ‘Time to sew up and go home?’ ‘No!’ said the surgeon, ‘I’m 
going to do a distal pancreatectomy’. Histology showed no discrete insulinoma, but diff  use islet cell hyper plasia (nesidioblastosis).
  How much pancreas to resect? 
Too little and nothing is gained: too much spells pancreatic endocrine disaster. Luckily the surgeon guessed right, and the patient was cured by the procedure.
16Pursuing a voyage to the islets of Langerhans to the bitter endInsulinoma
This often benign ( 90–95%) pancreatic islet cell tumour  is sporadic or seen with MEN-1 
(p223). It presents as fasting hypoglycaemia, with Whipple’s triad:
1       Sym p toms associated with fasting or exercise.
2       Recorded hypoglycaemia with symptoms.
3       Symptoms relieved with glucose.
Screening test Hypoglycaemia + plasma insulin during a long fast.
Suppressive tests  Give IV insulin and measure C-peptide. Normally exogenous insu-
lin suppresses C-peptide production, but this does not occur in insulinoma.
Imaging CT/MRI  ± endoscopic pancreatic US ± IACS (see BOX; all fallible, so don’t waste 
too much time before proceeding to intra-operative visualization ± intra-operative ul-
trasound). 18F-L-3,4 -dihydroxyphenylalanine PET-CT can help guide laparoscopic surgery.
Treatment Excision.
Nesidioblastosis See BOX. If this doesn’t work, options are:  diet, diazoxide, dextrose 
IVI, enteral feeding, everolimus.
 Diabe tic ketoacidosis Results from insulin deﬁ  ciency (eg unknown diagnosis, 
intercurrent illness, interuption of insulin therapy). See p 832.
_OHCM_10e.indb   215_OHCM_10e.indb   215 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyThyroid function tests ( TFTs)
Physiology
Fig 5.12 Pathways involved in thyroid function.
TRH from the hypothalamus acts on the pituitary glandThyroid-stimulating hormone ( TSH=thyro tropin ), a glycoprotein, is produced from 
the anterior pituitary ( ﬁ g 5.12). The thyroid produces mainly T4, which is 5-fold less 
active than T3. 85% of T3 is formed from peripheral conversion of T4. Most T3 and T4 
in plasma is protein bound, eg to thyroxine-binding globulin ( TBG). The unbound por-
tion is the active part. T3 and T4 cell metabolism, via nuclear receptors, and are thus 
vital for growth and mental development. They also catecholamine eff  ects. Thyroid 
hormone abnormalities are usually due to problems in the thyroid gland itself, and 
rarely caused by the hypothalamus or the anterior pituitary.
Basic tests See table 5.2. Free T4 and T3 are more useful than  total T4 and T3 as the 
latter are aff  ected by TBG. Total T4 and T3 are  when TBG is  and vice versa . TBG is  
in pregnancy, oestrogen therapy ( HRT, oral contraceptives), and hepatitis. TBG is  in 
nephrotic syndrome and malnutrition (both from protein loss), drugs (androgens, 
cortico steroids, phenytoin), chronic liver disease, and acromegaly. TSH is very useful:
  •Hyper thyroidism suspected:  Ask for T3, T4, and TSH. All will have TSH (except the 
rare TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma). Most have T4, but ~1% have only raised T3.
  •Hypo thyroidism suspected or monitoring replacement : Ask for only T4 and 
TSH. T3 does not add any extra information. TSH varies through the day: trough at 
2PM; 30% higher during darkness, so during monitoring, try to do at the same time.
Sick euthyroidism:  In any systemic illness, TFT S may become deranged. The typical 
pattern is for ‘everything to be low’. The test should be repeated after recovery.
Assay interference  is caused by antibodies in the serum, interfering with the test.
Other tests
  •Thyroid autoantibodies: Antithyroid peroxidase ( TPO; formerly called microsomal) 
antibodies or antithyro globulin antibodies may be increased in autoimmune thy-
roid disease: Hashimoto’s or Graves’ disease. If +ve in Graves’, there is an increased 
risk of developing hypothyroidism at a later stage.
  •TSH receptor antibody: May be  in Gr aves’ disease (useful in pregnancy).
  •Serum th yroglobulin:  Useful in monitoring the treatment of carcinoma (p 600), and 
in detection of factitious (self-medicated) hyperthyroidism, where it is low.
  •Ultrasound: This distinguishes cystic (usually, but not always, benign) from solid 
(possibly malignant) nodules. I f a solitary (or dominant) large nodule, in a multi nod-
ular goitre, do a ﬁ  ne-needle aspiration to look for thyroid cancer; see ﬁ g 13.23, p601.
  •Isotope scan:  (123Iodine, 99technetium pertechnetate, etc; see ﬁ g 13.22, p601.) Useful 
for determining the cause of hyperthyroidism and to detect retrosternal goitre, ec-
topic thyroid tissue or thyroid metastases ( + whole body CT). If there are suspicious 
nodules, the question is: does the area have increased (hot), decreased (cold), or the 
same (neutral) uptake of isotope as the remaining thyroid (see ﬁ g 5.13). Few neu-
tral and almost no hot nodules are malignant. 20% of ‘cold’ nodules are malignant. 
Surgery is most likely to be needed if: •rapid growth •compression signs •dominant 
nodule on scintigr aphy •nodule 3cm •hypo-echogenicity.  See also p 738.
_OHCM_10e.indb   216_OHCM_10e.indb   216 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
Fig 5.13 The images are from an isotope scan, with and without markers placed over the ster-
nal notch. We can see on the left that the nodule is metabolically inactive (‘cold’). The hot nod-
ule (right pair) is a very avid nodule causing background thyroid suppression.
 Image courtesy of Dr Y. T. Huang.
  •Patients with atrial ﬁ  brillation.
  •Patients with hyperlipidaemia ( 4–14% have hypothyroidism).
  •Diabetes mellitus —on annual review.
  •Women with type 1 DM during 1st trimester and post delivery ( 3-fold rise in 
incidence of postpartum thyroid dysfunction).
  •Patients on amiodarone or lithium ( 6 monthly).
  •Patients with Down’s or Turner’s syndrome, or Addison’s disease (yearly).
Table 5.2 Interpreting TFT S
Hormone proﬁ  le Diagnosis
TSH, T4 Hypothyroidism
TSH, normal T4 Treated hypothyroidism or subclinical hypo thyroidism (p 221)
TSH, T4 TSH-secreting tumour or thyroid hormone resistance
TSH, T4 and T3 Slow conversion of T4 to T3 (deiodinase deﬁ  ciency; euthyroid 
hyperthyroxinaemia*) or thyroid hormone antibody artefact
TSH, T4 or T3 Hyperthyroidism
TSH, normal T4 and T3Subclinical hyperthyroidism
TSH, T4 Central hypothyroidism (hypothalamic or pituitary disorder)
TSH, T4 and T3 Sick euthyroidism or pituitary disease
Normal TSH, 
abnormal T4Consider changes in thyroid-binding globulin, assay inter-
ference, amiodarone, or pituitary TSH tumour
*In ‘consumptive hypothyroidism’ deiodinase activity is ; suspect if thyroxine doses have to be .Screen the following for abnormalities in thyroid function
_OHCM_10e.indb   217_OHCM_10e.indb   217 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyThyrotoxicosis
The clinical eff  ect of excess thyroid hormone, usually from gland hyperfunction.
Symptoms Diarrhoea; w eight; appetite (if , paradoxical weight gain in 10%); 
over-active; sweats; heat intolerance; palpitations; tremor; irritability; labile emotions; 
oligo menorrhoea ± infertility. Rarely psychosis; chorea; panic; itch; alopecia; urticaria.
Signs Pulse fast/irregular ( AF or SVT; VT rare);   warm moist skin; ﬁ  ne tremor; pal-
mar erythema; thin hair; lid lag; lid retraction (exposure of sclera above iris; caus-ing ‘stare’, ( ﬁ g 
5.14; eyelid lags behind eye’s descent as pat ient watches your ﬁ  nger 
descend slowly). There may be goitre (ﬁ  g 5.15); thyroid nodules; or bruit depending 
on the cause. Signs of Graves’ disease:  1 Eye disease  (BOX ‘Thyroid eye disease’): 
exoph th almos, ophthalmoplegia. 2 Pretibial myxoedema: oedematous swellings 
above lateral malleoli: the term myxoedema is confusing here. 3 Thyroid acropachy:  
extreme manifestation, with clubbing, painful ﬁ  nger and toe swelling, and periosteal reaction in limb bones.
Tests  
TSH (suppressed), T4, and  T3. There may be mild normocytic anaemia, mild neu-
tropenia (in Graves’),  ESR, Ca2+, LFT. Also: Check thyroid autoantibodies. Isotope scan 
if the cause is unclear, t
o detect nodular disease or subacute thyroiditis. If ophthal-
mopathy, test visual ﬁ  elds, acuity, and eye move ments (see BOX ‘Thyroid eye disease’).
CausesGr
aves’ disease: Prevalence: 0.5% (⅔ of cases of hyperthyroidism).  :≈9:1. Typical 
age: 40–60yrs (younger if maternal family history). Cause: circulating IgG autoan-
tibodies binding to and activating G-protein-coupled thyrotropin receptors, which 
cause smooth thyroid enlargement and hormone production (esp. T3), and react 
with orbital autoantigens. Triggers: stress; infection; childbirth. Patients are often hyperthyroid but may be, or become, hypo- or euthyroid. It is associated with other autoimmune diseases: vitiligo, type 
1 DM, Addison’s (table 5.3).
Toxic multinodular goitre: Seen in the elderly and in iodine-deﬁ  cient areas.  There 
are nodules that secrete thyroid hormones. Surgery is indicated for compressive symptoms from the enlarged thyroid (dysphagia or dyspnoea).
 
Toxic adenoma: There is a solitary nodule producing T3 and T4. On isotope scan, the 
nodule is ‘hot’ (p 216), and the rest of the gland is suppressed.
Ectopic thyroid tissue: Metastatic follicular thyroid cancer,  or struma ovarii: ovar-
ian teratoma with thyroid tissue.
Exogenous: Iodine excess, eg food contamination, cont r ast media ( thyroid storm, 
p834, if already hyperthyroid).  Levothyroxine excess causes  T4, T3, thyro globulin.
Others: 1 Subacute de Quervain’s thyroiditis:  self-limiting post-viral with painful 
goitr
e, T° ± ESR. Low isotope uptake on scan. :  NSAID S. 2 Drugs: amiodarone (p 220), 
lithium (hypothyroidism more common).  3 Postpartum. 4 TB (rare).  
Treatment
1       Drugs: -block ers (eg propranolol 40mg/6h) for rapid control of symptoms. Anti-
thyroid medication: two strategies (equally eff  ective): 17 A T itration,  eg carbim azole 
20–40mg/24h PO for 4wks, reduce according to TFTs every 1–2 months. B  Block-
r
eplace: Give carbimazole + levothyroxine simultaneously (less risk of iatrogenic 
hypothyroidism). In Graves’, maintain on either regimen for 12–18 months then 
withdraw. ~50% will relapse, requiring radioiodine or surgery. Carbimazole SE: 
agranulocytosis ( neutrophils, can lead to dangerous sepsis; rare ( 0.03%)); warn 
to stop and get an urgent FBC if signs of infection, eg T°, sore throat/mouth ulcers.
2       R adioiodine ( 131I): Most become hypothyroid post-treatment. There is no evi-
dence f
or cancer, birth defects, or infertility in women. CI: pregnancy, lactation. 
Caution in active hyperthyroidism as risk of thyroid storm (p 835).
3       T hyroidectomy (usually total): Carries a risk of damage to recurrent laryngeal 
nerv
e (hoarse voice) and hypoparathyroidism. Patients will become hypothyroid, 
so thyroid replacement needed.
4       In pr egnancy and infancy:  Get expert help. See OHCS p24 & OHCS p182.
Complications Heart failure (thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy,  in elderly ), angina, AF 
(seen in 10–25%: control hyperthyroidism and war farinize if no contraindication), 
osteoporosis, ophthalmopathy, gynaecomastia. Thyroid storm (p 835).
_OHCM_10e.indb   218_OHCM_10e.indb   218 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologySeen in 25–50% of people with Graves’ disease. The main known risk factor is 
smoking. The eye disease may not correlate with thyroid disease and the patient 
can be euthyroid, hypothyroid, or hyperthyroid at presentation. Eye disease may 
be the ﬁ  rst presenting sign of Graves’ disease, and can also be worsened by treat-
ment, typically with radioiodine (usually a transient eff  ect). Retro-orbital inﬂ  am-
mation and lymphocyte inﬁ  ltration results in swelling of the orbit.
Symptoms  Eye discomfort, grittiness, tear production, photophobia, diplopia, 
acuity, aff  erent pupillary defect (p 72) may mean optic nerve compression: Seek 
expert advice at once as decompression may be needed . Nerve damage does not 
necessarily go hand-in-hand with protrusion. Indeed, if the eye cannot protrude 
for anatomical reasons, optic nerve compression is more likely —a paradox!
Signs  Exophthalmos —appearance of protruding eye; proptosis —eyes protrude 
beyond the orbit (look from above in the same plane as the forehead); conjunctival 
oedema; corneal ulceration; papilloedema; loss of colour vision. Ophth almoplegia 
(especially of upward gaze) occurs due to muscle swelling and ﬁ  brosis.
Tests  Diagnosis is clinical. CT/MRI of the orbits may reveal enlarged eye muscles.
Management  Get specialist help. Treat hyper- or hypothyroidism. Advise to stop 
smoking ( worse prognosis).   Most have mild disease that can be treated sympto-
matically (artiﬁ  cial tears, sunglasses, avoid dust, elevate bed when sleeping to 
periorbital oedema). Diplopia may be managed with a Fresnel prism stuck to one 
lens of a spectacle (aids easy changing as the exophthalmos changes). In more se-
vere disease, try high-dose steroids ( IV methylprednisolone is better than predniso-
lone 100mg/day PO)18—decreasing according to symptoms. Surgical decomp ression 
is used for severe sight-threatening disease, or for cosmetic reasons once the activ-
ity of eye disease has reduced (via an inferior orbital approach, using space in the 
ethmoidal, sphenoidal, and maxillary sinuses). Eyelid surgery may improve cosmesis 
and function. Orbital radiotherapy can be used to treat ophthalmoplegia but has lit-
tle eff  ect on proptosis. Future options:  Anti- TNF antibodies (eg inﬂ  iximab).Thyroid eye disease
Fig 5.14 Thyroid eye dis-
ease: lid retraction causing a 
‘staring’ appearance.
Fig 5.15 Goitre.
*Emotional or tactile stimuli cause spasms; seen in any autoimmune state (eg type 1 DM); : baclofen ± IV Ig.Table 5.3 Manifestations of Graves’ disease —and pathophysiology
Pituitary Suppressed TSH Expression of thyrotropin  subunit
Heart Rate; contractility Serum atrial natriuretic peptide
Liver Peripheral T3; LDL (p690) Type 1 5’-deiodinase; LDL receptors
Bone Bone turnover; osteoporosis Osteocalcin; ALP; urinary N-telopeptide
Genital  Libido; erectile dysfunction Sex hormone globulin; testosterone
Genital  Irregular menses Oestrogen antagonism
Metabolic Thermogenesis; O2 use Fatty acid oxidation; Na-K ATPase
White fat Fat mass Adrenergic-mediated lipolysis
CNS Stiff  person syndrome (rare)*Antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase
Muscle Proximal myopathy Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-activated ATPase
Thyroid Secretion of T3 and T4 Type 2 5’-deiodinase activity in thyroidDiffuse
  •Physiological
  •Graves’ disease
  •Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
  •Subacute (de Quervain’s) 
thyroiditis (painful).
Nodular
  •Multinodular goitre
  •Adenoma
  •Carcinoma.Causes of goitre
_OHCM_10e.indb   219_OHCM_10e.indb   219 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyHypothyroidism (myxoedema)
The clinical eff  ect of lack of thyroid hormone. It is common ( 4/1000/yr). If treated, 
prognosis is excellent; untreated it is disastrous (eg heart disease, dementia). As 
it is insidious, bo
th you and your patient may not realize anything is wrong , so be 
alert to subtle, non-speciﬁ  c symptoms, esp. in women  40yrs old ( :≈6:1).
Symptoms Tiredness; sleepy, lethargic; mood; cold-disliking;  w eight; constip ation; 
men  orrhagia; hoarse voice;  memory/cognition; dementia; myalgia; cramps; weakness.
Signs BRADYCARDIC ; reﬂ exes relax slowly; a taxia (cerebellar); d ry thin hair/skin; 
yawn  ing/ dr owsy/ coma (p 834); cold hands ±  T°; ascites ± non-pitting oedema (lids; 
hands; f
eet) ±  peri cardial or pleural eff  usion; round puff  y face/double chin/obese; d e-
f
eated demeanour; immobile ± ileus; CCF. Also: neuropathy; myopathy; goitre ( ﬁ g 5.16).
Diagnosis (p216) Have a low threshold for doing TFTs! TSH (eg ≥ 4mU/L);3 T4 (in rare 
secondary hypothyroidism:  T4 and  TSH or   due to lack from the pituitary, p 232). 
Cholesterol and triglyceride; macrocytosis (less often normochromic anaemia too).
Causes of primary autoimmune hypothyroidism
  •P
rimary atrophic hypothyroidism: : ≈6:1. Common. Diff  use lymphocytic inﬁ  lt-
ration of the thyroid, leading to atrophy, hence no goitre.
  •Hashimo to’s thyroiditis: Goitre due to lympho cy tic and plasma cell inﬁ  ltration. 
Commoner in women aged 60–70yrs. May be hypothyroid or euthyroid; rarely initial 
period of hyper thyroid (‘Hashitoxicosis’). Autoantibody titres are very high.
Other causes of primary hypothyrodism
World-wide the chief cause is iodine deﬁ  cienc y.
  •Post-th yroidectomy  or radioiodine treatment.
  •Drug-induced: Antithyroid drugs, amiodarone, lithium, iodine.
  •Subacut e thyroiditis: Temporary hypothyroidism after hyperthyroid phase.
Secondary hypothyroidism Not enough TSH (due to hypopituitarism); very rare.
Hypothyroidism’s associations  Autoimmune is seen with other autoimmune dis-
eases (t
ype 1 DM, Addison’s, and PA, p334). Turner’s and Down’s syndromes, cystic 
ﬁ brosis, primary biliary cholangitis, ovarian hyperstimulation ( OHCS p311);  POEMS  syn-
drome —poly neuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, m-protein band (plasma-
cytoma) + skin pigmentation/tethering. Genetic: Dyshormonogenesis: genetic (often 
aut
osomal recessive) defect in hormone synthesis, eg Pendred’s syndrome (with deaf-
ness): there is  uptake on isotope scan, which is displaced by potassium perchlorate.
Pregnancy problems Eclamp sia, anaemia, pr ematurity, birthweight, stillbirth, PPH.
Treatment
  •Health
y and young: Levothyroxine ( T4), 0–100mcg/ 24h PO; review at 12wks. Ad-
just 6-weekly by clinical state and to normalize but not suppress  TSH (keep TSH 
>0.5mU/L). Thyroxine’s t½ is ~ 7d, so wait ~ 4wks before checking TSH to see if a 
dose change is right. NB: small changes in serum free T4 have a logarithmic eff  ect 
on TSH. Once normal, check TSH yearly. Enzyme inducers (p 689) metabolism of 
levothyroxine.
  •Elderly or ischaemic hear t disease: Start with 25mcg/ 24h; dose by 25mcg/ 4wks 
according to TSH (cautiously, as levothyroxine may precipitate angina or MI).
  •I f diagnosis is in question and T4 already given: Stop T4; recheck TSH in 6 weeks.
Amiodarone An iodine-rich drug structurally like T4 ; 2% of users will get signiﬁ  -
cant thyroid problems from it. Hypothyroidism can be caused by toxicity from io-dine excess (
T4 release is inhibited). Thyrotoxicosis may be caused by a destructive 
thyroiditis causing hormone release. Here, radioiodine uptake can be undetectable and if this is the case, glucocorticoids may help. Get expert help. Thyroidectomy may be needed if amiodarone cannot be discontinued.
 T ½ of amiodarone ≈80d, so 
problems persist after withdrawal. If on amiodarone, check TFT S 6-monthly.
My xoedema coma The ultimate hypothyroid state before death. See p 834.
3 Treat the patient not the blood level! No e xact cut-off   in TSH can be given partly because risk of death 
from heart disease mirrors TSH even when in the normal range in women. Risk ≈ 1.4 if TSH 1.5–2.4 vs 1.7 if TSH 
2.5–3.5. If TSH >3.65 and possibly symptomatic, a low dose of levothyroxine may be tried.   Monitor symptoms, 
TSH and  T4 carefully. Over-exposure to thyroxine may cause osteoporosis ± AF.
_OHCM_10e.indb   220_OHCM_10e.indb   220 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyAlmost all our cell nuclei have receptors showing a high affi   nity for T3: that known 
as TR-1 is abundant in muscle and fat; TR-2 is abundant in brain; and TR-1 is 
abundant in brain, liver, and kidney. These receptors, via their inﬂ  uence on various 
enzymes, aff  ect the following processes:
  •The metabolism of substrates, vitamins, and minerals.
  •Modulation of all other hormones and their target-tissue responses.
  •Stimulation of O 2 consumption and generation of metabolic heat.
  •Regulation of protein synthesis, and carbohydrate and lipid metabolism.
  •Stimulation of demand for co-enzymes and related vitamins.Why are symptoms of thyroid disease so various, and so subtle?
Subclinical hypothyroidism Suspect if  TSH >4mU/L with normal T4 and T3, and no 
symptoms. It is common: ~10% of those >55yrs have TSH. Risk of progression to 
frank hypothyroidism is ~2%, and increases as TSH; risk doubles if thyroid peroxi-
dase antibodies are present, and is also increased in men. Management:
  •Conﬁ rm that raised TSH is persistent (recheck in 2–4 months).
  •Recheck the history: if any non-speciﬁ  c features (eg depression), discuss beneﬁ  ts 
of treating (p 220) with the patient —maybe they will function better.
  •Have a low threshold for carefully supervised treatment as your patient may 
not be so asymptomatic after all, and cardiac deaths may be prevented.  Treat 
if: 1 TSH ≥10mu/L. 2 +ve thyroid autoantibodies. 3 Past (treated) Graves’. 4 Other 
organ-speciﬁ  c autoimmunity (type 1 DM, myasthenia, pernicious anaemia, viti-
ligo), as they are more likely to progress to clinical hypothyroidism.  If TSH 4–10, 
and vague symptoms , treat for 6 months —only continue if symptoms improve 
(or the patient is trying to conceive).  If the patient does not fall into any of these 
categories, monitor TSH yearly.
  •Risks from well-monitored treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism are small 
(but ther e is an risk of atrial ﬁ  brillation and osteoporosis if over-treated).
Subclinical hyperthyroidism occurs when TSH, with normal T4 and T3. There 
is a 41% increase in relative mortality from all causes versus euthyroid control 
subjects —eg from AF and osteoporosis. Management:
  •Conﬁ rm that suppressed TSH is persistent (recheck in 2–4 months).
  •Check for a non-thyroidal cause: illness, pregnancy, pituitary or hypothalamic 
insuffi   ciency (suspect if T4 or T3 are at the lower end of the reference range), use 
of TSH-suppressing medication, eg thyroxine, steroids.
  •If TSH <0.1, treat on an individual basis, eg with symptoms of hyperthyroidism, AF, 
unexplained weight loss, osteoporosis, goitre.
  •Options are carbimazole or propylthiouracil —or radioiodine therapy.
  •If no symptoms, recheck 6-monthly.Subclinical thyroid disease
Fig 5.16 Facial appearance in hypothyroidism. Look 
for: pallor; coarse, brittle, diminished hair (scalp, 
axillary, and pubic); dull or blank expres sion lack ing 
sparkle; coarse features; puff  y lids. These signs are 
subtle: have a low thres hold f or meas uring TSH.
Reproduced from Cox and Roper, Clinical Skills , 2005, 
with permission from Oxford University Press.
_OHCM_10e.indb   221_OHCM_10e.indb   221 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyParathyroid hormone and hyperparathyroidism
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is normally secreted in response to low ionized Ca2+ levels, 
by four parathyroid glands situated posterior to the thyroid (p 601). The glands are 
controlled by Ωve feedback via Ca2+ levels. PTH acts by: •osteoclast activity releasing 
Ca2+ and PO 43Ω from bones •Ca2+ and PO43Ω reabsorption in the kidney •active 
1,25 dihydroxy-vitamin D3 production is . Overall eff  ect is Ca2+ and PO43Ω.
Primary hyperparathyroidism Causes: ~80% solitary adenoma, ~20% hyper plasia of 
all glands, <0.5% parathyroid cancer. Presentation: Often ‘asymp tomatic’ ( not in retro-
spect! ), with Ca2+ on routine tests. Signs relate to: 1 Ca2+ (p676): weak, tired, depressed, 
thirsty, dehydrated-but-polyuric; also renal stones, abdominal pain, 
panc reatitis, and ulcers (duodenal : gast ric ≈ 7:1). 2 Bone resorption 
eff ects of PTH can cause pain, fractures, and osteopenia/osteopo-
rosis. 3 BP: so check Ca2+ in everyone  with hypertension.   Associa-
tion: MEN-1  (BOX ‘Multiple endocrine neoplasia’). Tests:  Ca2+ & PTH or 
inappropriately normal (other causes of this: thiazides, lithium, fa-
milial hypo calciuric hypercalcaemia, ter tiary hyper parathyroidism). 
Also PO43Ω (unless in renal failure), ALP from bone activity, 24h uri-
nary Ca2+. Imaging: osteitis ﬁ  brosa cystica  (due to severe resorp-
tion; rare) may show up as subperiosteal erosions, cysts, or brown 
tumours of phal anges ± acro-osteolysis ( ﬁ g 5.17) ± ‘pepper-pot’ 
skull. DEXA (p683; for osteopor osis, p 682). : If mild: advise ﬂ uid in-
take to prevent stones; avoid thiazides + high Ca2+ & vit D intake; 
see 6-monthly. Excision of the adenoma or of all four hyperplastic 
glands prevents fractures and peptic ulcers.   Indications: high se-
rum or urinary Ca2+, bone disease, osteo por osis, renal calculi, renal 
function, age 50yrs.  Complications:  Hypo para thy roidism, recur-
rent laryngeal nerve damage (  hoarse), sympto matic Ca2+ (hungry 
bones syndr ome; check Ca2+ daily for ≥14d post-op). Pre-op US and 
MIBI scan may localize an adenoma; intra-operative PTH sampling is 
used to conﬁ  rm removal.   Recurrence:  ~8% over 10yrs.19 Cinacalcet 
(a ‘calcimimetic’) sensitivity of parathyroid cells to Ca2+ ( PTH secret ion); monitor Ca2+ 
within 1 week of dose changes; SE: myalgia; testosterone.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism Ca2+, PTH (appropriately). Causes:  vit D intake, 
chronic renal failure.  : Correct causes. Phosphate binders; vit  D; cinacalcet if PTH 
≥85pmol/L and parathyroidectomy tricky.
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism Ca2+, PTH ( inappropriately ). Occurs after pro-
longed secondary hyperparathyroidism, causing glands to act autonomously having 
undergone hyperplastic or adenomatous change. This causes Ca2+ from secretion 
of PTH unlimited by feedback control. Seen in chronic renal failure.
Malignant hyperparathyroidism  Parathyroid-related protein ( PTHrP) is produced 
by some squamous cell lung cancers, breast and renal cell carcinomas. This mimics 
PTH resulting in Ca2+ (PTH is , as PTHrP is not detected in the assay).
Hypoparathyroidism
Primary hypoparathyroidism  PTH secretion is  due to gland failure. Tests:  Ca2+, 
PO43Ωor , ALP. Signs:  Those of hypocalcaemia, p 678 ± autoimmune co morbid ities 
(BOX ‘Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes’). Causes:  Autoimmune; congenital (Di 
Geor ge syn., OHCS p642).  : Ca2+ supplements + calcitriol (or synthetic  PTH /12h SC: it 
prevents hypercalciuria).  
Secondary hypoparathyroidism  Radiation, surgery (thyroidectomy, parathyroid-
ectomy), hypomagnesaemia (magnesium is required for PTH secretion).
Pseudohypoparathyroidism  Failure of target cell response to PTH. Signs:  Short 
metacarpals (esp. 4th and 5th, ﬁ g 5.18), round face, short stature, calciﬁ  ed basal 
ganglia ( ﬁ g 5.19), IQ. Tests: Ca2+, PTH,  or ALP. : As for 1° hypoparathyroidism.
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism  The morphological features of pseudo hypo-
parathyroidism, but with normal biochemistry. The cause for both is genetic.  Fig 5.17 Acro-
osteo lysis.
©Dr I Maddison 
myweb.lsbu.ac.uk.
_OHCM_10e.indb   222_OHCM_10e.indb   222 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyIn MEN syndromes there are functioning hormone-producing tumours in multiple 
organs (they are inherited as autosomal dominants). 20 They comprise: •MEN-1 and  2 
•Neuroﬁ  bromatosis (p 514) •Von Hippel –Lindau and  Peutz –Jeghers syndromes 
(p712 & p708)  •Carney complex (spotty skin pigmentation, schwannomas, myxoma 
of skin, mucosa, or heart, especially atrial myxoma), and endo crine tumours: eg 
pituit ary adenoma, adrenal hyperplasia, and testicular tumour.  
MEN-1:
  •Parathyroid hyperplasia/adenoma ( ~95%; most Ca2+).
  •Pancreas endocrine tumours ( 70%)—gastrin oma (p 716) or insulinoma (p 215), or, 
rarely, somatostatin oma ( DM + steatorrhoea  + gallstones/cholangitis), VIPoma 
(p258), or gluc agonomas ( ±glucagon syndrome: migrating rash; glossitis; cheili-
tis, ﬁ g 8.5 p327; an aemia; weight; plasma glucagon; glucose).  
  •Pituitary prolactinoma ( ~50%) or GH secreting tumour (acromegaly: 21 p239); also, 
adrenal and carcinoid tumours are associated.
The MEN-1  gene is a tum our suppressor gene. Menin, its protein, alters trans cription 
activation.   Many are sporadic, presenting in the 3rd–5th decades.
MEN-2a:
  •Thyroid: medullary thyroid carcinoma (seen in ~100%, p 600).
  •Adrenal: phaeochromocytoma ( ~50%, usually benign and bilateral).
  •Parathyroid hyperplasia ( ~80%, but less than 20% have Ca2+). 
MEN-2b: Has similar features to MEN-2 a plus mucosal neuromas and Marfanoid 
appearance (p 706), but no hyper parathyroidism.  Mucosal neuromas consist of 
‘bumps’ on: lips, cheeks, tongue, glottis, eyelids, and vis ible corneal nerves.  
The gene involved in MEN-2 a and b is the ret proto-oncogene, a receptor tyrosine 
kinase. Tests for ret mutations are revol ution izing MEN-2  treatment by enabling a 
prophylactic thyroidectomy to be done before neoplasia occurs, usually before 
3yrs of age.   NB: ret mutations rarely contribute to sporadic parathyroid tumours.Multiple endocrine neoplasia ( MEN types 1, 2a, and 2b)
Autoimmune disorders cluster into two deﬁ  ned syndromes:
Type 1 Autosomal recessive, rare.
Cause:  Mutations of AIRE (Auto Immune REgulator) gene on chromosome 21.
Features:  •Addison’s disease. •Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. •Hypo-
parathyroidism. Also associated with hypogonadism, pernicious anaemia, autoim-
mune primary hypothyroidism, chronic active hepatitis, vitiligo, alopecia.
Type 2 HLA D3 and D4 linked, common. Cause:  Polygenic.
Features: •Addison’s disease. •Type 1 diabetes mellitus (in 20%).
  •Autoimmune thyroid disease —hypothyroidism or Graves’ disease.
Also associated with primary hypogonadism, vitiligo, alopecia, pernicious anae-
mia, chronic atrophic gastritis, coeliac disease, dermatitis herpetiformis.Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes
Fig 5.19 Cerebral calciﬁ  cation in pseudohypopara thyroid-
ism: periventricular (left) and basal ganglia (right).  
Courtesy of Professor Peter Scally.Fig 5.18 Pseudohypopara-
thyroidism: short 4th and 5th 
metacarpals.
_OHCM_10e.indb   223_OHCM_10e.indb   223 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyAdrenal cortex and Cushing’s syndrome
Physiology The adrenal cortex produces steroids: 1 Glucocorticoids (eg cortisol), 
which aff  ect carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism. 2 Mineralocorticoids , 
which control sodium and potassium balance (eg aldosterone, p 668). 3 Androgens, 
sex hormones which have weak eff  ect until peripheral conversion to testosterone 
and dihydrotestosterone. Corticotropin-releasing factor ( CRF) from the hypothala-
mus stimulates ACTH secretion from the pituitary, which in turn stimulates cortisol 
and androgen production by the adrenal cortex. Cortisol is excreted as urinary free 
cortisol and various 17-oxogenic steroids.
Cushing’s syndrome This is the clinical state produced by chronic glucocorticoid 
e
xcess + loss of the normal feedback mechanisms of the hypothalamo –pituitary –
adrenal axis and loss of circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion (normally highest on waking). The chief cause is oral steroids. Endogenous causes are rare: 
80% are due 
to ACTH;  of these a pituitary adenoma (Cushing’s disease) is the commonest cause.
1       ACTH-dependent causes ( ACTH)
  •Cushing’s disease: Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia from an ACTH-secreting pituitary 
adenoma (usually a microadenoma, p 234). :>1:1. Peak age: 30–50yrs. A low-
dose dexamethasone test ( BOX) leads to no change in plasma cortisol, but 8mg 
may be enough to more than halve morning cortisol (as occurs in normals).  
  •Ectopic ACTH production: Especially small cell lung cancer and carcinoid tum-
ours, p 271. Speciﬁ  c features: pigmentation (due to ACTH), hypokalaemic 
metabolic alkalosis ( cortisol leads to mineralocorticoid activity), weight loss, 
hyper glycaemia. Classical features of Cushing’s are often absent. Dexamethasone 
even in high doses ( 8mg) fails to suppress cortisol production.
  •Rarely, ectopic CRF production: Some thyroid (medullary) and prostate cancers.
2       ACTH-independent causes ( ACTH due to Ωve feedback)
  •Iatrogenic: Pharmacological doses of steroids (common).
  •Adrenal adenoma/cancer: (May cause abdo pain ± virilization in  , p230.) Because 
the tumour is autonomous, dexamethasone in any dose won’t suppress cortisol.
  •Adrenal nodular hyperplasia: (As for adrenal adenoma, no dexamethasone sup-
pr
ession.)
  •Rarely: Carney complex, p 223. McCune –Albright syndrome, see OHCS p650.
Symptoms W eight; mood change (depression, lethargy, irritability, psychosis); 
proximal weakness; gonadal dysfunction (irregular menses; hirsut ism; erectile dys-function); acne; recurrent Achilles tendon rupture; occasionally virilization if .
Signs Central obesity; plethoric, moon face; buff  
 alo hump; supraclavicular fat distri-
bution; skin & muscle atrophy; bruises; purple abdominal striae ( ﬁ g 5.20); osteoporo-
sis; BP; glucose; infection-prone; poor healing. Signs of the cause (eg abdo mass).
Tests  Random plasma cortisols may mislead, as illness, time of day, and stress (eg 
v
ene puncture) inﬂ  uence results. Also, don’t rely on imaging to localize the cause: non-
functioning ‘incidentalomas’ occur in ~ 5% on adrenal CT and ~10% on pituitary MRI. 
MRI detects only ~ 70% of pituitary tumours causing Cushing’s (many are too small).
Treatment Depends on the cause.
• I atrogenic: Stop medications if possible.
  •Cushing ’s disease: Selective removal of pituitary adenoma (trans -sphenoidally ). 
Bilateral adrenalectomy if source unlocatable, or recurrence post-op (complica-
tion: Nelson’s syndrome: skin pigmentation due to  ACTH from an enlarging pituitary 
tumour, as adrenalectomy removes Ωve feedback; responds to pituitary radiation).
  •A drenal adenoma or carcinoma: Adrenalectomy: ‘cures’ adenomas but rarely 
cur
es cancer. Radiotherapy  & adrenolytic drugs (mitotane) follow if carcinoma.
  •E ctopic ACTH: Surgery if tumour is located and hasn’t spread. Metyrapone, ketocon-
az
ole, and ﬂ  uconazole cortisol secretion pre-op or if awaiting eff  ects of radia-
tion. Intubat ion + mifepristone (competes with cortisol at receptors) + etomidate 
(blo cks cortisol synthesis) may be needed, eg in severe ACTH-associated psychosis.
Prognosis Untreated Cushing’s has v ascular mortality. 22 Treated, prognosis is good 
(but myopathy, obesity, menstrual irregularity,  BP, osteoporosis, subtle mood chang-
es and DM often remain —so follow up carefully, and manage individually).  
_OHCM_10e.indb   224_OHCM_10e.indb   224 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyFirst, conﬁ  rm the diagnosis (a raised plasma cortisol), then localize the source on 
the basis of laboratory testing. Use imaging studies to conﬁ  rm the likely source.
1st-line  tests Overnight dexamethasone suppression test  is a good outpatient 
test. Dexamethasone 1mg PO at midnight; do serum cortisol at 8AM. Normally, 
cortisol suppresses to <50nmol/L; no suppression in Cushing’s syndrome. False Ωve 
rate: <2%; false +ves: 2% normal, 13% obese, and 23% of inpatients. NB: false +ves 
(pseudo -Cushing’s ) are seen in depression, obesity, alcohol excess, and inducers of 
liver enzymes ( rate of dexamethasone metabolism, eg phenytoin, phenobarbital, ri-
fampicin, p 689). 24h urinary free cortisol  (normal: <280nmol/ 24h) is an alternative.
2nd-line tests  If 1st-line tests abnormal: 48h dexamethasone suppression test:  
Give dexamethasone 0.5mg/6h PO for 2d. Measure cortisol at 0 and 48h (last test 
at 6h after last dose). Again, in Cushing’s syndrome, there is a failure to suppress 
cortisol. 48h high-dose dexamethasone suppression test: (2mg/6h.) May distin-
guish pituitary (suppression) from others causes (no/part suppression).  Midnight 
cortisol:  Admit (unless salivary cortisol used). Often inaccurate due to measure-
ment issues. Normal cir cadian rhythm (cortisol lowest  at midnight, highest  early 
morning) is lost in Cushing’s syndrome. Midnight blood, via a cannula during sleep, 
shows cortisol  in Cushing’s.
Localization tests  (Where is the lesion?) If the 1st- and 2nd-line tests are +ve—
Plasma ACTH. If ACTH is undetectable , an adrenal tumour is likely  CT/MRI  adrenal 
glands. If no mass, proceed to adrenal vein sampling . If ACTH is detectable , dis-
tinguish a pituitary cause from ectopic ACTH production by high-dose suppression 
test or  corticotropin-releasing hormone ( CRH) test:  100mcg ovine or human CRH 
IV.  Measure cortisol at 120min. Cortisol rises with pituitary disease but not with 
ectopic ACTH production. 
If tests indicate that cortisol responds to manipulation, Cushing’s disease is 
likely. Image the pituitary ( MRI) and consider bilateral inferior petrosal sinus  
blood  sampling .
If tests indicate that cortisol does not respond to manipulation, hunt for the 
source of ectopic ACTH —eg IV contrast CT of chest, abdomen,  and pelvis   ± MRI of 
neck, thorax, and abdomen, eg for small ACTH secreting carcinoid tumours.Investigating suspected Cushing’s syndrome
Fig 5.20 Hypercortisolism weakens skin; 
even normal stretching (or the pressure of 
obesity, as here) can make its elastin break —
on healing we see these depressed purple 
scars (striae). Cortisone or rapid growth con-
tributes to striae in other contexts: pregnan-
cy, adolescence, weight lifting, sudden-onset 
obesity, or from strong steroid creams. Striae 
mature into silvery crescents looking like the 
underside of willow leaves. Unsightly imma-
ture striae may be improved by YAG lasers.  
_OHCM_10e.indb   225_OHCM_10e.indb   225 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyAddison’s disease (adrenal insuffi   ciency)
Primary adrenocortical insuffi   ciency  (Addison’s disease) is rare ( ~0.8/100 000), 
but can be fatal. Destruction of the adrenal cortex leads to glucocorticoid (cortisol) 
and mineralocorticoid (aldosterone) deﬁ  ciency (see ﬁ g 5.21). Signs are capricious: 
it is ‘ the unforgiving master of non-speciﬁ  city and disguise ’.23 You may diagnose 
a viral infection or anorexia nervosa in error (K+ is  in the latter but  in Addison’s).
Physiology:
Causes:  80% are due to autoimmunity in the UK. Other causes:  TB (commonest cause 
worldwide ), adrenal metastases (eg from lung, breast, renal cancer), lymphoma,   op-
portunistic infections in HIV (eg CMV, Mycobacterium avium , p400); adrenal haem-
orrhage ( Waterhouse –Friderichsen syndrome p 714; antiphospho lipid syndrome;  
SLE),  congenital (late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia).
Secondary adrenal insuffi   cienc y The commonest cause is iatrogenic, due to long-
term steroid therapy leading to suppression of the pituitary –adrenal axis. This only 
becomes apparent on withdrawal of the steroids. Other causes are rare and include 
hypothalamic –pituitary disease leading to ACTH production. Mineralocorticoid pro-
duction remains intact, and there is no hyperpigmentation as ACTH.
Symptoms  Often diagnosed late: lean, tanned, tired, tearful ± weakness, anorexia, 
dizzy, faints, ﬂ  u-like myalgias/arthralgias. Mood:  depression, psychosis.  GI: nausea/
vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea/constipation. Think of Addison’s in all with un-
explained abdominal pain or vomiting .  Pigmented palmar creases & buccal mucosa  
(ACTH; cross-reacts with melanin receptors ). Postural hypotension. Vitiligo. Signs 
of critical deterioration  (p836): Shock ( BP, tachycardia), T°, coma.
Tests  Na+ & K+ (due to mineralocorticoid), glucose (due to cortisol). Also: urae-
mia, Ca2+, eosinophilia, anaemia. : Short ACTH stimulation test (Synacthen® test):  
Do plasma cortisol before and ½h after tetracosactide (Synacthen®) 250mcg IM. 
Addis on’s is excluded if 30min cortisol >550nmol/L. Steroid drugs may interfere 
with assays: ask lab. NB: in pregnancy and contraceptive pill, cortisol levels may 
be reass  uring but falsely , due to cortisol-binding globulin. Also: •ACTH: In Addi-
son’s, 9AM ACTH is  (>300ng/L: inappropriately high). It is low in secondary causes 
•21-Hydroxylase adrenal autoantibodies:  +ve in autoimmune disease in >80% 
•Plasma renin & aldosterone:  to assess mineralocortocoid status.  AXR/CXR: Any 
past TB, eg upper zone ﬁ  brosis or adrenal calciﬁ  cation? If no autoantibodies, con-
sider further tests (eg adrenal CT) for TB, histoplasma,  or metastatic disease.  
Treatment  See p 836 for Addisonian crisis (shocked). Replace steroids: ~15–25mg 
hydrocortisone daily, in 2 –3 doses, eg 10mg on waking, 5mg lunchtime.   Avoid giving 
late (may cause insomnia). Mineralocorticoids to correct postural hypotension, Na+, 
K+: ﬂ udrocortisone PO from 50–200mcg daily. Adjust both on clinical grounds. If 
there is a poor response, sus pect an associated auto immune disease (check thyroid, 
do coeliac serology: p 266). Fig 5.21 Pathways involved in adrenal function.
_OHCM_10e.indb   226_OHCM_10e.indb   226 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologySteroid use Advise wearing a bracelet declaring steroid use. Add 5–10mg hydrocor-
tisone to daily intake before strenuous activity/exercise. Double steroids in febrile 
illness, injury, or stress. Give out syringes and in-date IM hydrocortis one, and show 
how to inject 100mg IM if vomiting prevents oral intake (seek medical help; admit for 
IV ﬂ uids if dehydrated).
Follow-up Yearly ( BP, U&E); watch for autoimmune diseases (pernicious anaemia).4
Prognosis (treated) Adrenal crises and infections do cause excess deaths: mean age 
at death f
or men is ~65yrs ( 11yrs <estimated life expectancy; women lose ~3yrs). 
‘Typical day —wakes up at 11.30, still feels tired, then will have some breakfast 
and usually fall asleep on the couch. The most energy req. activity in last 1 month 
is—cooking herself a pasta meal. Then, totally exhausted will sleep more in pm, 
then eat some dinner. Goes to bed at 11pm—latest. Not able to concentrate...Used 
to weigh 45kg. Now weighs 42kg.’24
Placed on a page about Addison’s disease, we might think there are suffi   cient 
clues to raise the suspicion of Addison’s (even though her electrolytes were not 
particularly awry, and her pigmentation was barely perceptible). But change the context to our last busy clinic. We are a little distracted. The memory of Addison’s 
is fading. Who among us will hear the alarm bell ring?Excerpt from the notes of Miss E.L.R., 92 days before her death from 
undiagnosed Addison’s disease. From the Coroner’s Court…Replacement steroids are vital in those taking long-term steroids when acutely unwell. Adrenal insuffi   ciency may develop with deadly hypovolaemic shock, if ad-ditional steroid is not given.
 See p 836.
Steroid use:  Warn against abruptly stopping steroids. Emphasize that prescribing 
doct
ors/dentists/surgeons must  know of steroid use: give steroid card. Exogenous steroid use
4 Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes types 1–4: 1 Monogenic syndrome ( AIRE gene on chromosome 
21); signs: candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism + Addison’s. 2 (Schmidt syndrome.) Adrenal insuffi   ciency + auto 
immune thyroid disease ± DM ± pleuritis /pericarditis. 3 Autoimmune thyroid disease + other autoimmune 
conditions but not Addison’s. 4 Autoimmune combinations not included in 1–3.
_OHCM_10e.indb   227_OHCM_10e.indb   227 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyHyperaldosteronism
Primary hyperaldosteronism  Excess production of aldosterone, independent of 
the r
enin –angiotensin system, causing sodium and water retention, and renin re-
lease. Consider if: hypertension, hypokalaemia, or alkalosis in someone not on diuret-
ics. Sodium tends to be mildly raised or normal.
Symptoms: Often asymptomatic or signs of hypokalaemia (p 674): weakness (even 
quadriparesis), cramps, paraesthesiae, polyuria, polydipsia. BP but not always.  
Causes: ~ ⅔ due t o a solitary aldosterone-producing adenoma (linked to mutations 
in K+ channels)5—Conn’s syndrome. ~ ⅓ due to bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia. 
Rare causes: adrenal carcinoma; or glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism ( GRA) — 
the ACTH regulatory element of the 11-hydroxylase gene fuses to the aldosterone 
synthase gene, aldosterone production, & bringing it under the control of ACTH.
Tests:  U&E, renin and aldosterone, and adrenal vein sampling. Do not rely on a low 
K+, as >20% are normokalaemic. For GRA (suspect if there is a family history of 
early hypertension), genetic testing is available.  Treatment: •Conn’s: lapar oscopic 
adrenalectomy. Spironolactone ( 25–100mg/24h PO) for 4wks pre-op controls BP and 
K+. •Hyperplasia: tr eated medically: spironolactone or amiloride. • GRA: dexametha-
sone 1mg/24h PO for 4wks, normalizes biochemistry but not always BP. If BP is still , 
use spironolactone as an alternative. •Adrenal carcinoma:  surgery ± post-operative 
adrenolytic therapy with mitotane —prognosis is poor.
Secondary hyperaldosteronism  Due to a high renin from r enal perfusion, eg in 
renal artery stenosis, accelerated hypertension, diuretics, CCF, or hepatic failure.
Bartter’s syndrome  This is a major cause of congenital (autosomal recessive) 
salt w
asting —via a sodium and chloride leak in the loop of Henle via mutations in 
channels and transporters. Presents in childhood with failure to thrive, polyuria, and polydipsia. 
BP is normal. Sodium loss leads to volume depletion, causing renin and 
aldosterone production, leading to hypokalaemia and metabolic alkalosis, urinary 
K+ and ClΩ. Treatment: K+ replacement, NSAID S (to inhibit prostaglandins), and ACE-i.
Phaeochromocytoma
Rare catecholamine-producing tumours. They arise from sympathetic paragan-glia cells (
=phaeo chrome bodies), which are collections of chromaffi   n cells. They 
are usually found within the adrenal medulla. Extra-adrenal tumours (para-gangliomas) are rarer, and often found by the aortic bifurcation (the organs of Zuckerkandl). Phaeochromocytomas roughly follow the 
10% rule: 10% are 
malignant, 10% are extra-adrenal, 10% are bilateral, and 10% are familial. Re-
cent data suggest higher preponderance in patients with genetic mutations aff ecting several genes including 
SDH (succinyl dehydrogenase). Thus, family his-
tory is crucial and referral for genetic screening (particularly <50 years old). A 
dangerous but treatable cause of hypertension (in <0.1%). Associations ~90% 
are sporadic; 10% are part of hereditary cancer syndromes (p 215), eg thyroid, 
MEN-2A  and 2B, neuroﬁ  bromatosis, von Hippel –Lindau syndrome ( SDH mutations).
Classic triad Episodic headache, sweating, and tachycardia ( ± , , or  BP, see BOX 
‘Features of phaeochromocytoma’).  
Tests  •Biochemical: 24h urine for metanephrines/metadrenaline (better than cat-
echolamines and vanillylmandelic acid 25), WCC. •Localization: Abdominal CT/MRI, 
or meta-iodo benzylguanidine (chromaffi   n-seeking isotope) scan (can ﬁ  nd extra-
adrenal tumours, p 738). Treatment Sur gery: -block ade pre-op: phen oxybenzamine 
(-blocker) is used before -blocker to avoid crisis from unopposed -adrenergic stimulation, -block too if heart disease or tachycardic. Consult the anaesthe-
tist. Post-op: Do 
24h urine metanephrine 2wks post-op, monitor BP (risk of  BP). 
Emergency  : p837. If malignant, chemotherapy or therapeutic radiolabelled MIBG 
may be used.   Follow-up:  Lifelong: malignant recurrence may present late, genetic 
scr
eening.
5 Tumours from the zona g lomerulosa, zona f asciculata, or zona reticularis associate with syndromes of  
mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, or a ndrogens respectively, usually; remember ‘ GFR≈miner GA’.
_OHCM_10e.indb   228_OHCM_10e.indb   228 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
6 Takotsubo cardiomyopathy  (=stress- or catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy/broken heart syn-
drome) may cause sudden chest pain mimicking MI, with  ST segments, and its signature apical ballooning 
on echo (also ejection fraction) occurring during catecholamine surges.   It is a cause of MI in the presence 
of normal arteries. The stress may be medical ( SAH, p478) or psychological.  Think of Conn’s in these contexts:
  •Hypertension associated with hypokalaemia.
  •Refractory hypertension, eg despite ≥ 3 antihypertensive drugs.
  •Hypertension occurring before 40yrs of age (especially in women). 
The approach to investigation remains controversial, but the simplest is to look 
for a suppressed renin and aldosterone (may be normal if there is severe hy-pokalaemia). 
CT or MRI of the adrenals is done to localize the cause. This should 
be done after hyperaldosteronism is proven, due to the high number of adrenal incident alomas. If imaging shows a unilateral adenoma, adrenal vein sampling  
may be done (venous blood is sampled from both adrenals). If one side reveals increased aldosterone:cortisol ratio compared with the other (
>3-fold diff  erence), 
an adenoma is likely, and surgical excision is indicated. If no nodules or bilateral nodules are seen, think about adrenal hyperplasia or 
GRA.
NB: renal artery stenosis is a more common cause of refractory BP and K+ (p315).Hypertension: a common context for hyperaldosteronism tests
Try to diagnose before death: suspect if BP hard to control, accelerating, or episodic.
  •Hear t: P ulse; palpit ations/ VT; dyspnoea; faints; angina; MI/LVF; cardiomyopathy.6
  •CNS: Headache; visual disorder; dizziness; tremor; numbness; ﬁ  ts; encephalopa-
thy; Horner’s syndrome (paraganglioma); subarachnoid/ CNS haemorrhage.
  •Ps ychological:  Anxiety; panic; hyperactivity; confusion; episodic psychosis.
  •Gut: D&V; abdominal pain over tumour site;   mass; mesenteric vasoconstriction.
  •Others: Sweats/ﬂ  ushes; heat intolerance; pallor; T°; backache; haemoptysis.
Symptoms may be precipitated by straining, exercise, stress, abdominal pressure, surgery, or by agents such as -blockers, 
IV contrast agents, or the tricyclics. The 
site of the tumour may determine precipitants, eg if pelvic, precipitants include sexual intercourse, parturition, defecation, and micturition. Adrenergic crises may last minutes to days. Suddenly patients feel ‘as if about to die’
—and then get 
better, or go on to develop a stroke or cardiogenic shock. On examination, there may be no signs, or hypertension ± signs of heart failure/cardiomyopathy ( ± para-
doxical shock, similar to Takotsubo’s
6), episodic thyroid swelling, glycosuria during 
attacks, or terminal haematuria from a bladder phaeochromocytoma.Features of phaeochromocytoma (often episodic and often vague)
_OHCM_10e.indb   229_OHCM_10e.indb   229 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyHirsutism, virilism, gynaecomastia, and impotence
Hirsutism is common ( 10% of women) and usually benign. It implies male pattern 
hair growth in women. Causes are familial, idiopathic, or are due to androgen secre-
tion by the ovary (eg polycystic ovarian syndrome, ovarian cancer, OHCS p281), the 
adrenal gland (eg late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia, OHCS p251, Cushing’s 
syndrome, adrenal cancer), or drugs (eg steroids). Polycystic ovarian syndrome 
(PCOS) causes secondary oligo - or amenorrhoea, infertility, obesity, acne, and hirsutism 
(OHCS p252). Ultrasound: bilateral polycystic ovaries. Blood tests: testosterone 
(if ≥6nmol/L, look for an androgen-producing adrenal or ovarian tumour), sex-
hormone binding globulin,  LH : FSH ratio (not consistent), TSH, lipids. Address any feel-
ings of lack of conformity to society’s perceived norms of feminine beauty.  
Management: Healthy eating, optimize weight, shaving; laser photoepilation; wax; 
cr
eams, eg eﬂ  ornithine, or ele c trolysis (expensive/time-consuming, but eff  ective); 
bleach ( 1 : 10 hydrogen peroxide).
  •Oestrogens: combined contraceptive pill ( OHCS p302)—Yasmin® is one choice as its 
progestogen, drospirenone, is an antimineralocorticoid.   Alternatively, co-cyprindiol 
provided there are no contraindications, such as uncontrolled hypertension and 
current breast cancer. Stop co-cyprindiol 3–4 months after hirsutism has complete-
ly resolved because of increased VTE risk. If COC S are contraindicated or have not 
worked (after 6/12), refer the woman to secondary care for specialist treatment:
  •Metformin (helps with insulin resistance) and spironolactone are sometimes tried.
  •Clomifene is used for infertility (a fertility expert should prescribe).
Virilism Onset of amenorrhoea, clitoromegaly, deep voice, temporal hair recession + 
hirsutism. Look for an androgen-secreting adrenal or ovarian tumour.
Gynaecomastia (ie abnormal amount of breast tissue in men; may occur in normal 
pubert
y.) Oestro gen/androgen ratio  (vs galactorrhoea in which prolactin is ). 
Causes: Hypogonadism (see BOX ‘Male hypogonadism’), liver cirrhosis ( oestrogens), 
hyperthyroidism, tumours (oestrogen-producing, eg testicular, adrenal; HCG-producing, 
eg testicular, bronchial); drugs: oestrogens, spirono lactone, digoxin, testosterone, 
marijuana; if stopping is impossible, consider testosterone if hypogonadism ±  anti-
oestrogen (tamoxifen).  
Impotence  (= erectile dysfunction)  Erections result from neuronal release of nitric 
o
xide ( NO) which, via c GMP and Ca2+, hyperpolarizes and thus relaxes vascular and 
trabecular smooth muscle cells, allowing engorgement.  Common after 50yrs, and of-
ten multifactorial. A psychological facet is common (esp. if erectile dysfunction occurs only in some situations, if onset coincides with stress, and if early morning erections still occur: these also persist in early organic disease).
Organic causes:  The big three: smoking, alcohol, and diabetes (reduce 
NO +autonomic 
neuropathy). Also endocrine: hypogonadism, hyperthyroidism,  prolactin; neurologi-
cal: cord lesions,  MS, autonomic neuropathy; pelvic surgery, eg bladder-neck, prostate; 
radiotherapy; atheroma; renal or hepatic failure; prostatic hyper plasia; penile 
anomalies, eg post-priapism, or Peyronie’s (p 708); drugs: digoxin, -blockers, diuretics, 
antipsychotics, antidepressants, oestrogens, ﬁ  nasteride, narcotics.
Workup: After a full sexual and psychological history do: U&E, LFT, glucose, TFT, LH, FSH, 
lipids, testosterone, prolactin ±  Doppler. Is penile arterial pressure enough for inﬂ  ow? 
Is penile sensation OK (if not, ? CNS problem)? Is the veno-occlusive mechanism OK?
: •Treat causes. •Counselling. •Oral phosphodiesterase ( PDE5) inhibitors c GMP. 
Erection isn’t auto matic (depends on erotic stimuli). Sildenaﬁ  l 25–100mg ½–1h pre-
sex (food and alcohol upset abs orption).  SE: Headache ( 16%); ﬂ  ush ing ( 10%); dys -
pepsia ( 7%); stuff  y nose ( 4%); transient blue-green tingeing of vision (inhibition of 
retinal PDE6). CI: See BOX ‘Contraindications and cautions to PD5 Inhibitors’. Tadalaﬁ  l 
(long t½,) 10–20mg ½–36h pre-sex. Don’t use >once daily. Vardenaﬁ  l (5–20mg). •Vacu-
um aids (ideal f
or penile rehabilitation after radical prostatectomy),  intra cavernosal 
injections, transurethral pellets, and pros theses (inﬂ  atable or malleable; partners 
may receive unnatural sensations). •Corpus cavernosum tissue engineering (eg on 
acellular collagen scaff  
olds) is in its infancy.
_OHCM_10e.indb   230_OHCM_10e.indb   230 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyContraindications
  •Concurrent use of nitrates.
  •BP high or systolic <90mmHg/arrhythmia.
  •Degenerative retinal disorders, eg retinitis pigmentosa.
  •Unstable angina/stroke <6 months ago.
  •Myocardial infarction <90 days ago.
Cautions Angina (especially if during intercourse).
  •Bleeding; peptic ulcer (sildenaﬁ  l).
  •Marked hepatic or renal impairment.
  •Peyronie’s disease or cavernosal ﬁ  br osis.
  •Risk of priapism (sickle-cell anaemia, myeloma, leukaemia).
  •Concurrent complex antihypertensive regimens.
  •Dyspnoea on minimal eff  ort (sexual activity may be unsupportable).
Use in coronary artery disease has been a question, but is probably OK.26
Interactions: Nitrates (contraindication); cytochrome p 450 (CYP3A ) inducers: 
macrolides, protease inhibitors, theophyllines, azole antifungals, rifamp  icin, phe-
nytoin, carbamazepine, pheno barbital, grapefruit juice (bioavailability). Caution if 
-blocker use; avoid vardenaﬁ  l with type 1A (eg quinidine; procainamide) and type 3 
anti-arrhythmics (sotalol; amiodarone) —as well as nitrates as above-mentioned.Contraindications and cautions to PD5 inhibitors
Hypogonadism is failure of testes to produce testosterone, sperm, or both. Fea-
tures: small testes, libido, erectile dysfunction, loss of pubic hair,  muscle bulk, 
fat, gynaecomastia, osteoporosis, mood. If prepubertal:  virilization; incomplete 
puberty; eunuchoid body; reduced secondary sex characteristics. Causes include:
Primary hypogonadism is due to testicular failure, eg from •local trauma, tor-
sion, chemo
therapy/irradiation •post-orchitis, eg mumps, HIV, brucellosis, leprosy 
•renal failure, liver cirrhosis, or alcohol excess (toxic to Leydig cells) •chromosom-
al abnormalities, eg Klinef
elter’s syndrome ( 47XXY )—delayed sexual development, 
small testes, and gynaecomastia. Anorchia is rare.
Secondary hypogonadism Gonado tropins ( LH & FSH ), eg from •hypo pituitarism 
•prolactinoma •Kallman’s syndrome —isolated gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
deﬁ ciency, often with anosmia and colour blindness •systemic illness (eg COPD; HIV; 
DM) •Laurence –Moon –Biedl and Prader –Willi syndromes ( OHCS p648 & p652) •Age.
: (p232) If total testosterone  8nmol/L, on 2 mornings (or <15 if LH too) and  muscle 
bulk, testosterone may help,   eg 1% dermal gel (Testogel®). Heart, bladder, and sex-
ual fun ction may perk up in age-related hypogonadism.  Beware medicalizing ageing!
CI Ca2+; nephrosis; polycythaemia; prostate, breast or liver ca. Monitor PSA.Male hypogonadism
_OHCM_10e.indb   231_OHCM_10e.indb   231 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyHypopituitarism
Hypopituitarism entails  secretion of anterior pituitary hormones (ﬁ  gs 5.3, 5.22). They 
are aff  ected in this order: growth hormone ( GH), gonadotropins: follicle-stimulating 
hormone ( FSH) and luteinizing hormone ( LH), thyroid-stimulating hormone ( TSH), and 
adreno corticotrophic hormone ( ACTH), prolactin ( PRL). Panhypo pituitarism is deﬁ  cien-
cy of all anterior hormones, usually caused by irradiation, surgery, or pituitary tumour.
Causes are at three levels. 1 Hypothalamus: Kallman’s syndrome (p 231), tumour, 
inﬂ am mation, infection (meningitis, TB), ischaemia. 2 Pituitary stalk: Trauma, sur-
gery
, mass lesion (craniopharyngioma, p 234), meningioma, carotid artery aneurysm. 
3 Pituitary: Tumour, irradiation, inﬂ  ammation, autoimmunity,7 inﬁ ltration (haemo-
chromatosis, amy loid, metastases), ischaemia (pituitary apoplexy, p 234; DIC 8; Shee-
han’s syndrome9).
Features are due to:
1 Hormone lack: •GH: central obesity, atherosclerosis, dry wrinkly skin, strength, 
bala nce, well-being, exercise ability, cardiac output, osteoporosis, glucose.   
•Gonadotropin ( FSH; LH):  oligomenorrhoea or amenorrhoea, f ertility, libido, os-
teoporosis, breast atrophy, dyspareunia.  Erectile dysfunction, libido, muscle bulk, 
h
ypogonadism (hair, all over; small testes; ejaculate volume; spermatogenesis).  
•Thyroid: as f or hypothyroidism (p 220). •Corticotropin: as f or adrenal insuffi   ciency 
(p226). NB: no skin pigmentation as ACTH. •Prolactin: r are: absent lactation.
2 Causes: Eg pituitary tumour (p 234), causing mass eff  ect, or hormone secretion 
with secretion of other hormones —eg prolactinoma, acromegaly, rarely Cushing’s.
Tests  (The triple stimulation test is now rarely done.)
  •Basal t ests: LH and  FSH ( or ), testosterone or oestradiol (); TSH ( or ), T4 (); 
prolactin (may be , from loss of hypothalamic dopamine that normally inhibits its 
release), insulin-like growth factor- 1 (IGF-1; —used as a measure of GH axis, p 238), 
cortisol (). Also do U&E (Na+from dilution), Hb (normochromic, normocytic).
  •D ynamic tests: 1 Short Synacthen® test: (p 226) to assess the adrenal axis.   
2 Insulin tolerance test ( ITT): done in specialist centres to assess the adrenal and GH 
axes. CI: epilepsy, heart disease, adrenal failure. Consult lab ﬁ  rst. It involves IV insu-
lin to induce hypoglycaemia, causing stress to cortisol and GH secretion. It is done 
in the morning (water only taken from 22:00h the night before). Have 50% glucose 
and hydrocortisone to hand and IV access. Glucose must fall below 2.2mmol/L and 
the patient should bec ome symptomatic when cortisol and GH are taken. Normal: 
GH >20mU/L, and peak cortisol >550nmol/L.
3 Arginine + growth hormone-releasing hormone test.
4 Glucagon stimulation test is alternative when ITT is contraindicated.
  •In vestigate cause:  MRI scan to look for a hypothalamic or pituitary lesion.
Treatment Refer to an endocrinologist for assessment of pituitary fuction and to 
o
versee hormone replacement and treatment of underlying cause.
  •Hy drocortisone  for 2° adrenal failure (p 226) before other hormones are given.
  •Thyroxine if hypothyroid (p 220, but TSH is useless for monitoring).
  •Hypogonadism (for symptoms and to prevent osteoporosis). : op tions include 
testosterone enan thate 250mg IM every 3 weeks , daily topical gels or buccal 
muco  adhesive tablets. Patches (eg Testogel®) are also used. : (premenopausal). 
O
estrogen:  transdermal oestradiol patches, or contra ceptive pill (exceeds replace-
ment needs) ± testosterone or dehydroepi androsterone ( DHEA, in hypo androgenic 
women; a small amount may improve well-being and sexual function,   and help 
bone mineral density and lean body mass).
  •Gonadotropin ther apy is needed to induce fertility in both men and women.
  •Growth hormone ( GH). Somatotrophin mimics human GH. It addresses problems 
of fat mass, bone mass, lean body mass (muscle bulk), exercise capacity, and 
problems with heat intolerance.
7 Autoimmune hypophysitis ( =inﬂ amed pituitary) mimics pituitary adenoma. It may be triggered by preg-
nancy or immunotherapy blocking CTLA-4.  No pituitary auto-antigen is yet used diagnostically.
8 Snake bite is a common cause in India (eg when associated with acute kidney injury).
9 Sheehan’s syndrome is pituitary necrosis after postpartum haemorrhage.
_OHCM_10e.indb   232_OHCM_10e.indb   232 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
Fig 5.22 Neuroendocrinology: emotions  thoughts  actions.  As Michelangelo foretold (in his 
Creation of Adam ) ‘all gods and demons that have ever existed are within us as possibilities, de-
sires, and ways of escape’.  Within the dark red vault of our skull we see human and god-like forms 
reaching out, as thoughts escape into actions —with legs extending into our brainstem ( B) and a 
ﬁ st is pushing from our hypothalamus into the pituitary stalk ( P). Above the pituitary we have 
thoughts, ideas, impulses, and neur otransmitters. Below we have hormones. Between is the realm 
of neuroendocrinology —the neurosecretory cells which turn emotions into the releasing factors 
for the pituitary hormones ( ﬁ g 5.4).
Image courtesy of Gary Bevans; quote from Frank Lynn Meshberger. Michelangelo, Renaissance Man of 
the Brain, Too?
_OHCM_10e.indb   233_OHCM_10e.indb   233 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinolog yPituitary tumours
Pituitary tumours (almost always benign adenomas) account for 10% of intracranial 
tumours (see ﬁ  gs 5.23, 5.24). They may be divided by size: a microadenoma is a tumour 
<1cm across, and a macroadenoma is >1cm. There are three histological types ( table 5.4):
1       Chr omophobe 70%. Many are non-secretory,10 some cause hypopituitarism. Half 
produce prolactin ( PRL); a few produce ACTH or GH. Local pressure eff  ect in 30%.
2       A cidophil 15%. Secrete GH or PRL. Local pressure eff  ect in 10%.
3       Basophil 15%. Secrete ACTH. Local pressure eff  ect rare.
Symptoms are caused by pressure, hormones (eg galactorrhoea), or hypopituitarism 
(p232). FSH-secreting tumours can cause macro-orchidism in men, but are rare.
Features of local pressure Headache, visual ﬁ  eld defects (bilateral temporal hemi-
anopia, due to compression of the optic chiasm), palsy of cranial nerves III, IV, VI 
(pressure or invasion of the cavernous sinus; ﬁ  g 5.25). Also, diabetes insipidus ( DI) 
(p240; more likely from hypothalamic disease); disturbance of hypothalamic centres 
of T°, sleep, and appetite; erosion through ﬂ  oor of sella leading to CSF rhinorrhoea.
Tests  MRI deﬁ nes intra- and supra-sellar extension; accurate assessment of visual 
ﬁ elds; screening tests: PRL, IGF-1 (p238), ACTH, cortisol, TFT S, LH/FSH , testosterone in 
, short Synacthen® test. Glucose tolerance test if acromegaly suspected (p 238). 
If Cushing’s suspected, see p 225. Water deprivation test if DI is suspected (p 240).
Treatment Start hormone replacement as needed (p 232). Ensure steroids are given 
before levothyroxine, as thyroxine may precipitate an adrenal crisis.  For Cushing’s 
disease see p 225, prolactinoma p 236, acromegaly p 238.
  •Sur gery: (ﬁ g 5.26) Most pituitary surgery is trans-sphenoidal, but if there is supra-
sellar extension, a trans-frontal approach may be used. For prolactinoma, 1st-line 
treatment is medical with a dopamine agonist, p 236. Pre-op: ensure hydrocortisone 
100mg IV/IM. Subsequent cortisol replacement and reass essment varies with local 
protocols: get advice. Post-op: retest pituitary function (p232) to assess replace-
ment needs. Repeating dynamic tests for adrenal function ≥6 weeks post-op.
  •R adiotherapy: (Eg stereotactic.) Good for residual or recurrent adenomas (good 
r
ates of tumour control and normalization of excess hormone secretion). 27
Post-op Recurrence may occur late after surgery, so life-long follow-up is required. 
F
ertility should be discussed: this may be reduced post-op due to gonadotropins.
Pituitary apoplexy Rapid pituitary enlargement from a bleed into a tumour may 
cause mass eff  
ects, cardiovascular collapse due to acute hypopituit arism, and death.   
Suspect if acute onset of headache, meningism, GCS, ophthalmo plegia/visual ﬁ  eld 
defect, especially if there is a known tumour (may present like sub arachnoid haem-orrhage). : Urgent steroids (hydrocortisone 
100mg IV) and meticulous ﬂ  uid balance 
± cabergoline  (dopamine agonist, if prolactinoma) ± surgery; ﬁ  nd the cause, eg a 
predisposition to thrombosis, from antiphospholipid syndrome.  
Craniopharyngioma Not strictly a pituitary tumour: it originates from Rath ke ’s 
pouch so is situated between the pituitary and 3rd ventricle ﬂ  oor. They are rare, but 
are the commonest childhood intracranial tumour. Over 50% present in childhood 
with growth failure; adults may present with amenorrhoea, libido, hypothalamic symptoms (eg 
DI, hyperphagia, sleep disturbance) or tumour mass eff  ect. Tests:  CT/
MRI (calciﬁ  cation in 50%, may also be seen on skull x-ray). Treatment: Surgery ± 
post-op r
adiation; test pituitary function post-op.
Table 5.4 Frequency of hormones secreted by pituitary adenomas based on immunohistochemistry
Hormone % Hormone %
PRL only (prolactinoma) 35% ACTH (Cushing’s disease) 7%
GH only (acromegaly) 20% LH/FSH/TSH ≥1%*
PRL and GH 7% No obvious hormone 30%
*Sensitive methods of TSH measurement have improved recognition of TSH-secreting tumours. These are 
now more frequently found at microadenoma stage, medially loc a ted, and without associated hormone 
hypersecretion. In these tumours, somatostatin analogues (p 238) are very helpful. See also Socin et al . Eur 
J Endocrinol. 2003;148:433–42.
10 If <1cm, usually ‘incidentaloma’; most non-functioning macroadenomas are revealed by mass eff  ect and/
or hypopituitarism. Here, recurrence after surgery is common, so follow carefully with MRI S. 
_OHCM_10e.indb   234_OHCM_10e.indb   234 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyFig 5.23 Sagittal T1-weighted MRI of the brain 
(no gadolinium contrast) showing a lesion in 
the pituitary fossa, most likely a haem or rhagic 
pituitary adenoma. Diff  erential diagnosis in-
cludes a Rathke’s cleft cyst.
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.Fig 5.24 Coronal T1-weighted MRI of the brain 
(no gadolinium contrast) showing a lesion in the 
pituitary fossa (see ﬁ g 5.23).
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.
Fig 5.25 The pituitary gland’s relationships to cranial nerves  III, IV, V, and VI.
Reproduced from Turner and Wass, Oxford Handbook of Endocrinology and Diabetes , 2009, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.
Fig 5.26 Endoscopic surgery is now possible for pituitary surgery.
_OHCM_10e.indb   235_OHCM_10e.indb   235 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyHyperprolactinaemia
This is the commonest hormonal disturbance of the pituitary. It presents earlier 
in women (menstrual disturbance) but later in men (eg with erectile dysfunction and/or mass eff  ects). Prolactin stimulates lactation.
11,12 Raised levels lead to hypo-
gonadism, infertility, and osteoporosis, by inhibiting secretion of gonadotropin-re-leasing hormone (hence 
LH/FSH and testosterone or oestrogen).
Causes of raised plasma prolactin ( PRL; >390mU/L) PRL is secreted from the an-
terior pituitary and release is inhibited by dopamine produced in the hypothal amus. 
Hyperprolactinaemia may result from 1 Excess production from the pituitary, eg 
prolactinoma. 2 Disinhibition, by compression of the pituitary stalk, reducing local 
dopamine levels. 3 Use of a dopamine antagonist. A PRL of 1000 –5000mU/L may re-
sult from any, but >5000  is likely to be due to a prolactinoma, with macroadenomas 
(>10mm) having the highest levels, eg 10 000–100 000.
  •Ph ysiological: Pregnancy; breastfeeding; stress. Acute rises occur post-orgasm.11
  •Drugs (most common cause): Metoclop r amide; haloperidol; methyldopa; oes-
trogens; ecstasy/ MDMA ;12 antipsychotics (a reason for ‘non-compliance’: sustained 
hyperprolactinaemia may cause libido, anorgasmia, and erectile dysfunction).  
  •Diseases:  P rolactinoma: micro- or macroadenoma; Stalk damage:  pituitary ad-
enomas, surgery, trauma; Hypo thalamic disease:  craniopharyngioma, other tu-
mours; Other: hypothyroidism (due to  TRH), chronic renal failure (excretion).
Symptoms : Amenorrhoea or oligomenorrhoea; infertility; galactorrhoea (ﬁ  g 5.27). 
Also: libido, weight, dry vagina. :  Erectile dysfunction, f acial hair, galactorrhoea. 
May present late with osteoporosis or local pressure eff  ects from the tumour (p 234).
Tests  Basal PRL: non-stressful venepuncture between 09.00 and 16.00h. Do a preg-
nancy test, TFT, U&E. MRI  pituitary if other causes are ruled out.
Management Refer to a specialist endocrinology clinic. Dopamine agonists (bro-
mocrip
tine or cabergoline) are 1st line.
Microprolactinomas: A tumour <10mm on MRI (~25% of us have asymptomatic 
microprolactinomas). Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, PRL secretion, restores 
menstrual cycles and tumour size. Dose is titrated up: 1.25mg PO; increase weekly 
by 1.25–2.5mg/d until ~ 2.5mg/12h. SE: nausea, depression, postural hypotension (mini-
mize by giving at night). If pregnancy is planned, use barrier contraception until 2 
periods have occurred. If subsequent pregnancy occurs, stop bromocriptine after the 
1st missed period.   An alternative dopamine agonist is cabergoline: more eff  ec-
tive and fewer SE, but there are fewer data on safety in pregnancy. NB: ergot alkaloids 
(bromocriptine and cabergoline) can cause ﬁ  brosis (eg echocardiograms are need-ed). Trans-sphenoidal surgery may be considered if intolerant of dopamine agonists. It has a high success rate, but there are risks of permanent hormone deﬁ  ciency and 
prolactinoma recurrence, and so it is usually reserved as a 
2nd-line treatment.
Macroprolactinomas: A tumour >10mm diameter on MRI. As they are near the optic 
chiasm, there may be acuity, diplopia, ophthalmoplegia, visual-ﬁ  eld loss, and op-
tic atrophy.   Treat initially with a dopamine agonist (bromocriptine if fertility is the 
goal). Surgery is rarely needed , but consider if visual symptoms or pressure eff  ects 
which fail to respond to medical treatment. Bromocriptine, and in some cases radia-tion therapy, may be required post-op as complete surgical resection is uncommon. If pregnant, monitor closely ideally in a combined endocrine/antenatal clinic as there is risk of expansion.
Follow-up Monitor 
PRL. If headache or visual loss, check ﬁ  elds (? do MRI). Medication 
can be decreased after 2yrs, but recurrence of hyperprolactinaemia and expansion 
of the tumour may occur, and so these patients should be monitored carefully.
11 The prolactin increase ( and ) after coitus is ~ 400% greater than after masturbation; post-orgasmic 
prolactin is part of a feedback loop decreasing arousal by inhibiting central dopaminergic processes. The 
size of post-orgasmic prolactin increase is a neurohormonal index of sexual satisfaction.
12 MDMA  also oxytocin; prolactin + oxytocin are thought to mediate post-orgasmic well-being.
_OHCM_10e.indb   236_OHCM_10e.indb   236 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
Fig 5.27 Galactorrhoea can be proliﬁ  c enough to create medium-sized galaxies (bot tom right). 
In the Birth of the Milky Way  Hera is depicted by Rubens in her chariot, being drawn through 
the night sky by ominous black peacocks. Between journeys, she enjoyed discussing diffi   cult en-
docrinological topics with her husband Zeus (who was also her brother), such as whether women 
or men ﬁ  nd sexual intercourse more enjoyable. Hera inclined to the latter —and it is on this ﬂ  imsy 
evidence, and her gorgeous galactorrhoea, that we diagnose her hyperprolactin aemia (which is 
known to decrease desire, lubrication, orgasm, and satisfaction).   In the end, this issue was settled, 
in favour of Zeus’s view, by Tiresias, who had unique insight into this intriguing question: every time 
this soothsayer saw two snakes entwined, (s)he changed sex, so coming to know a thing or two 
about gender and pleasure. This is a primordial example of an ‘N of 1’ trial, where the subject is his 
or her own control. Generalizability can be a problem with this methodology.
© Fine Art Images/ Age Fotostock.
_OHCM_10e.indb   237_OHCM_10e.indb   237 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyAcromegaly
This is due to secretion of GH (growth hormone) from a pituitary 
tumour ( 99%) or hyperplasia, eg via ectopic GH-releasing hormone 
from a carcinoid tumour. :≈1:1. Incidence: UK 3/million/yr.   ~5% 
are associated with MEN-1  (p223). GH stimulates bone and soft tissue 
growth through secretion of insulin-like growth factor- 1 (IGF-1).
Symptoms  Acroparaesthesia ( akron=extremities); amenor-
rhoea; libido; headache; sweating; snoring; arthralgia; backache; 
ﬁ g 5.28: ‘My rings don’t ﬁ  t, nor my old shoes, and now I’ve got a 
wonky bite (malocclusion) and curly hair. I put on lots of weight, 
all muscle and looked good for a while; now I look so haggard ’. 
Signs  (BOX ‘Signs of acromegaly’ .) Often predate diagnosis by 
>4yrs. If acromegaly occurs before bony epiphyses fuse (rare), 
gigantism occurs.
Complications  (May present with CCF or ketoacidosis.)  
  •Impaired glucose tolerance ( ~40%), DM (~15%). 
  •Vascular: BP, left ventricular hypertrophy ( ±dilatation/ CCF), 
cardiomyopathy, arrhy thmias. There is risk of ischaemic heart 
disease and stroke (?due to BP ± insulin resistance and GH-in-
duced increase in ﬁ  brinogen and decrease in protein S).  
  •Neoplasia: colon cancer risk; colonoscopy ma y be needed. 21
Acromegaly in pregnancy  (Subfertility is common.) Pregnancy 
may be normal; signs and chemistry ma y remit.   Monitor glucose.
Tests  Glucose, Ca2+, and PO43Ω. GH: Don’t rely on random GH as 
secret ion is pulsatile and during peaks acromeg alic and normal 
levels overlap. GH also  in: stress, sleep, puberty, and pregnancy. 
Normally GH secretion is inhibited by high glucose, and GH hardly 
detectable. In acromegaly GH release fails to suppress.
  •If basal serum GH is >0.4mcg/L ( 1.2mIU/L) and/or if IGF-I (p232), 
an oral glucose tolerance test ( OGTT) is needed. If the lowest GH 
value during OGTT is above 1mcg/L ( 3mIU/L), acro megaly is con-
ﬁ rmed. With general use of very sensitive assays, it has been 
said that this cut-off   be decreased to 0.3mcg/L ( 0.9mIU/L).28 
Method: Collect samples for GH glucose at: 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 
150min. Possible false +ves: puberty, pregnancy, hepatic and 
renal disease, anorexia nervosa, and DM.
  •MRI scan of pituitary fossa. • Look for hypopituitarism (p 232).
  •Visual ﬁ  elds and acuity. • ECG, echo. Old photos if possible.
Treatment  Aim to correct (or prevent) tumour compression by 
excising the lesion, and to reduce GH and IGF-I levels to at least a 
‘safe’ GH level of <2mcg/L ( <6mIU/L).  A 3-part strategy: 1 Trans-
sphenoidal surgery is often 1st line. 2 If surgery fails to correct 
GH/IGF-I hypersecretion, try somatostatin analogues ( SSA) and/or 
radiotherapy, SSA being generally preferred. Example: octreotide 
(Sandostatin LAR®, given monthly IM), or lanreotide (Somatuline 
LA®). SE: pain at the injection site; gastrointestinal : abdominal 
cramps, ﬂ  atulence, loose stools, gallstones; impaired glucose 
tolerance. 3 The GH antagonist pegvisomant (recombinant GH ana-
logue) is used if resistant or intolerant to SSA. It supp resses IGF-1 
to normal in 90%, but GH levels may rise; rarely tumour size in-
creases, so monitor closely. Radiotherapy:  If unsuited to sur gery 
or as adjuv ant; ma y take years to work. Follow-up:  Yearly GH, IGF-
1  ± OGTT ; visual ﬁ  elds; vascular assess ment. BMI; photos ( ﬁ g 5.29).
Prognosis May return to normal (any excess mortality is mostly 
vascular ). 16% get diabetes with SSAs vs ~13% after surgery.  
Fig 5.28  Acromegaly. Courtesy of Omar Rio.
My life with acromegaly . (http://odelrio.blogspot.com )
_OHCM_10e.indb   238_OHCM_10e.indb   238 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
EndocrinologyFig 5.29 (a) and (b) Coarsening of the face and  growth of hands and mandible (prognathism).  
14 GH variants made by the placenta rise exponentially until 37wks’ gestation; pituitary GH gradually drops 
to near-undetectable levels. ‘Gestational acromegaly’ probably develops to foster fetoplacental growth; its 
side-eff  ects include facial oedema, carpal tunnel symptoms, and nose enlargement.
15 Puberty sees GH- and gonad-mediated rises in bone and muscle mass + other ‘acromegalic’ eff  ects.    •Growth of hands ( ﬁ g 5.29b; may be spade-like), jaw ( ﬁ g 5.29a) and feet (sole 
may encroach on the dorsum).
  •Coars ening f ace; wide nose.
  •Big supraorbital ridges.
  •Macroglossia (big tongue).
  •Widely spaced teeth.
  •Puff y lips, eyelids, and skin (oily and large-pored); also skin tags.
  •Scalp folds ( cutis v erticis gyrata ; due to expanding but tethered skin).
  •Skin darkening ( ﬁ g 5.29).
  •Acanthosis nigricans ( ﬁ g 12.28, p563).
  •Laryngeal dyspnoea (ﬁ  xed cords).
  •Obstructive sleep apnoea.
  •Goitre ( thyroid vascularity).
  •Proximal weakness + arthropathy.
  •Carpal tunnel signs in 50%, p 503.
  •Signs from any pituitary mass: hypopituitarism ± local mass eff  ect (p232; vision; 
hemianopia); ﬁ  ts. Signs of acromegaly
We might have devoted this box to a grotesque homunculus depicting the signs of 
acromegaly: all disconnected lips, hands, feet, brows, and noses. But our integra-
tive ethics disallow this, and ask us instead to see if acromegaly can reveal some-
thing universal about our patients and ourselves. What is it like to feel in the grip 
of some ‘alien puberty’ or ‘empty pregnancy’? These analogies are physiological as 
well as metaphorical.14,15 The changes of acromegaly are not so insidious that the 
patient thinks all is ﬁ  ne: there is often partial knowledge and a few dark thoughts 
on looking into the mirror. Even when we lay our lives end-to-end for inspection 
(ﬁ g 5.28), changes are subtle. It can take the observations of others to force us 
to come face-to-face with the truth of our new unfolding self. In one patient the 
comment was ‘So are you pregnant again?’ ‘Why do you ask?’ ‘Because your nose 
is as big as it was when you were last pregnant’. So here we have the well-known 
‘physiological acromegaly of pregnancy’14 predating the pathological, as the carni-
val of personal identity moves from helter-skelter to roller-coaster.Dysmorphia, personal identity, and acromegaly
(a)
 (b)
_OHCM_10e.indb   239_OHCM_10e.indb   239 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrino logyDiabetes insipidus ( DI)
Physiology This is the passage of large volumes ( >3L/day) of dilute urine due to 
impaired water resorption by the kidney, because of reduced ADH secretion from the 
posterior pituitary (cranial DI) or impaired response of the kidney to ADH (nephro-
genic DI).
Symptoms Polyuria; polydipsia; dehydration; symptoms of hypernatraemia (p 672). 
Polydipsia can be uncontrollable and all-consuming, with patients drinking anything 
and everything to hand: in such cases, if beer is on tap, disaster will ensue!  
Causes of cranial DI •Idiopathic ( 50%). •Congenital: defects in ADH gene, DIDMOAD .16 
•Tumour (may present with DI + hypopituitarism): craniopharyn gioma, metastases, 
pituitary tumour. •Trauma: temporary if distal to pituitary stalk as proximal nerve 
endings gr
ow out to ﬁ  nd capillaries in scar tissue and begin direct secretion again. 
•Hypophysectomy. •Autoimmune hypophysitis (p 232). •Inﬁ ltr ation: histiocytosis, 
sarcoid o sis.17 •Vascular: haemorrhage.18 •Infection: meningoencephalitis.
Causes of nephrogenic DI •Inherited. •Metabolic: lo w potassium, high calcium. 
•Drugs: lithium, demeclocy cline. •Chronic renal disease. •Post-obstructive uropathy.
Tests  U&E, Ca2+, glucose (exclude DM), serum and urine osmolalities. Serum osm ol ality 
estimate ≈ 2 ≈ (Na+ + K+) + urea + glucose (all in mmol/L). Normal plasma osmolality is 
285–295mOsmol/kg, and urine can be concentrated to more than twice this concentra-
tion. Signiﬁ  cant DI is excluded if urine to plasma ( U:P) osmolality ratio is more than 2:1, 
provided plasma osmolality is no greater than 295mOsmol/kg. In DI, despite raised 
plasma osmolality, urine is dilute with a U:P ratio <2. In primary polydipsia there may be 
dilutional hyponatraemia —and as hyponatraemia may itself cause mania,   be cautious 
of saying ‘It’s water intoxication from psychogenic polydipsia’.
Diagnosis Water deprivation test: See BOX ‘The 8-hour water deprivation test’ . NB: 
it is often diffi   cult to diff  erentiate primary polydipsia from partial DI. : DM; diuret-
ics or lithium use; primary polydipsia causes symptoms of polydipsia and polyuria 
with dilut
e urine. Its cause is poorly understood;19 it may be associated with schizo-
phrenia or mania (±Li+ therapy), or, rarely, hypothal amic dis ease (neurosarcoid; tu-
mour; encephalitis; brain injury; HIV encephalopathy).   As part of this syndrome, the 
kidneys may lose their ability to fully concentrate urine, due to a wash-out of the 
normal concentrating gradient in the renal medulla.
Treatment Cr anial DI: MRI (head); test anterior pituitary function (p 232). Give desm-
opressin, a synthetic analogue of ADH (eg Desmomelt® tablets).
Nephrogenic: Treat the cause. If it persists, try bendro ﬂ umethiazide 5mg PO/24h. 
NSAID S lower urine volume and plasma Na+ by inhibiting prostaglandin synthase: 
prostaglandins locally inhibit the action of ADH. 
Emergency management
  •Do urgent plasma U&E, and serum and urine osmolalities. Monitor urine output 
carefully and check U&E twice a day initially.
  •IVI to keep up with urine output. If severe hypernatraemia, do not lower Na+ rapidly 
as this may cause cerebral oedema and brain injury. If Na+ is ≥170, use 0.9% saline 
initially —this contains 150mmol/L of sodium. Aim to reduce Na+ at a rate of less 
than 12mmol/L per day. Use of 0.45% saline can be dangerous.
  •Desmopressin 2mcg IM (lasts 12–24h) may be used as a therapeutic trial.
16 DIDMOAD  is a rare autosomal recessive disorder: Diabetes Insipidus, Diabetes Mellitus, Optic Atrophy 
and Deafness (also known as Wolfram’s syndrome).
17 Suspect neurosarcoidosis if  CSF protein (seen in 34%), facial nerve palsy ( 25%), CSF pleocytosis ( 23%), 
diabetes insipidus ( 21%), hemiparesis ( 17%), psychosis ( 17%), papilloedema ( 15%), ataxia ( 13%), seizures 
(12%), optic atrophy ( 12%), hearing loss ( 12%), or nystagmus ( 9%).
18 Sheehan’s syndrome is pituitary infarction from shock, eg postpartum haemorrhage. It is rare.
19 Most of us could drink 20L/d and not be hyponatraemic; some get hyponatraemic drinking 5L/d; they 
may have Psychosis, Intermittent hyponatraemia, and Polydipsia ( PIP syndrome), ?from intravascular 
volume leading to atrial natriuretic peptide, p 137, hence natriuresis and hyponatraemia.
_OHCM_10e.indb   240_OHCM_10e.indb   240 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07
Endocrinology
In SIADH , ADH continues to be secreted in spite of low plasma osmolality or large 
plasma volume. Diagnosis requires concentrated urine (Na+ >20mmol/L and osmo-
lality >100mOsmol/kg) in the presence of hyponatraemia and low plasma osmolal-
ity. Causes are numerous. See p 673.Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion ( SIADH )Tests the ability of kidneys to concentrate urine for diagnosis of DI (dilute urine in 
spite of dehydration), and then to localize the cause (table 5.5). Do not do the test 
before establishing that urine volume is >3L/d (output less than this with normal 
plasma Na+ and osmolality excludes signiﬁ  cant disturbance of water balance).
  •Stop test if urine osmolalit y >600 mOsmol/kg in Stage 1 (DI is excluded).
  •Free ﬂ  uids until 07.30. Light breakfast at 06.30, no tea, no coff  ee, no smoking.
Stage 1 Fluid deprivation ( 0–8h): for diagnosis of DI. Start at 08.00.
  •Empty bladder, then no drinks and only dry food.
  •Weigh hourly. If >3% weight lost during test, order urgent serum osmolality. If 
>300mOsmol/kg, proceed to Stage 2. If <300, continue test.
  •Collect urine every 2h; measure its volume and osmolality.
  •Venous sample for osmolality every 4h.
  •Stop test after 8h (16.00) if urine osmolality >600 mOsmol/kg (ie normal).
Stage 2 Diff erentiate cranial from nephrogenic DI.
  •Proceed if urine still dilute —ie urine osmolality <600 mOsmol/kg.
  •Give desmopressin 2mcg IM. Water can be drunk now.
  •Measure urine osmolality hourly for the next 4h.
Table 5.5 Interpreting the water deprivation test
Diagnosis Urine osmolality
Normal Urine osmolality >600 mOsmol/kg in Stage 1 U:P ratio >2 (normal 
concentrating ability)
Primary polydipsia Urine concentrates, but less than normal, eg >400–600mOsmol/kg
Cranial DI Urine osmolality increases to >600 mOsmol/kg after  desmopres-
sin (if equivocal an extended water deprivation test may be tried 
(no drinking from 18:00 the night before))
Nephrogenic DI No increase in urine osmolality after desmopressinThe 8-hour water deprivation test
_OHCM_10e.indb   241_OHCM_10e.indb   241 02/05/2017   19:0702/05/2017   19:07